Right to oblivion - Soro: &quot;Anachronistic territorial barriers, this sentence penalizes users&quot; Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Claudia Guasco, &quot;Il Messaggero&quot; and &quot;Il Mattino&quot;, 25 September 2019 ) In an interconnected world and in an immaterial reality like that of the network, &quot;the territorial barrier appears increasingly anachronistic&quot;, says the president of the Authority for the protection of personal data Antonello Soro, from November 2014 leading a group of work that brings together the privacy authorities of European countries. Who urges against reading the ruling of the EU Court of Justice in Luxembourg which gives reason to Google in the matter of the right to be forgotten: &quot;The decision also has another aspect: it is an invitation to Google and to the competing groups to adopt solutions technology capable of discouraging European users from accessing search engines located in countries outside the EU.This implies a new technology commitment for company owners, who will have to come up with something so that an Italian does not access an indexed news item passing, for example, from the USA &quot;. President Soro, is this sentence a brake on the right to be forgotten? &quot;It certainly has a significant impact on the full effectiveness of this principle. Let&#39;s say that it expresses well the complexity of the digital society and the difficulty of reconciling the needs of organizing life on the net with the protection of personal rights. The Court&#39;s decision on the one hand slows down and it makes the effectiveness of the right to be forgotten more difficult and in the connected planet this appears a little out of time In any case, in recent months the percentage of de-indexation has been reduced: the distances of approach between guarantor and search engine&quot;. And the right to information? &quot;In the activity of control there is always an evaluation inherent to the right to information, however with the balancing of the defense of personal data the deindicization becomes congruous. We European authorities of the sector have long claimed it is indispensable, precisely because of the intangible nature of the network, proceeding not only towards a universal recognition of the right to data protection, but also to the effective protection of this right.The EU regulation has opened a virtuous path, many countries in the world are adopting equal rules very similar to ours. of convergence, of standardization of limits is the frontier for a more mature equation between the information right and the right to privacy in its sense of protection of personal dignity &quot;. That seems far away if some companies, in the event of serious crimes, refuse to reveal data contained in the phones. &quot;In our country, more than the difficulty in accessing data, there is an excess of wiretapping through technologies with the Trojan system, which massively collects data and conversations, including environmental data, massively, for a long time and for environmental reasons. it is possible to use wiretapping, but the invasiveness is detrimental to privacy. The problem is finding the balance, we have indicated it recently to the Government and to the Parliament &quot;.