EU data barrier against the Far West Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Authority for the protection of personal data (by Antonello Cherchi, &quot;IlSole24Ore&quot;, 6 May 2019 Data protection is not dead. Despite the overwhelming power of web giants, the defenders of privacy today have new arrows in their bows: this is the European regulation (the Gdpr), &quot;the first and most important response that the law has expressed with regard to the digital revolution&quot;. Antonello Soro, Privacy Guarantor, is convinced of this , which tomorrow will illustrate the effects of this change to Parliament The balance sheet of a year of European privacy will, however, also be a sort of legacy to those who prepare, after June 19, to take over the current college of the Authority. years lived intensely? We have met very important changes: from the revelations of Snowden, to the Cambridge Analytica scandal, to the explosion of the internet of things, to artificial intelligence, to the oblivion relevance. And then, the new European regulation. The feeling is that the rules, even the new ones, are inadequate to cope with such phenomena. No. Some categories of the regulation are becoming those of European law. I am thinking of the fact that the Gdpr is also applicable to subjects established outside of Europe who operate by collecting the data of European citizens. In recent days I was smiling, reflecting that Zuckerberg went from the slogan &quot;privacy is dead&quot; to that of &quot;the future is privacy&quot;. Some say that if Zuckerberg appreciates the Gdpr it is because he knows that he will not put the sticks in the wheels. It is not so. Privacy has also become a reputational factor: Zuckerberg is aware of the consequences, not only economic, of the new heavy sanctions and understands that in the global market the asymmetrical system built by him and a few others cannot live long. It is true that large companies have made a strong lobbying action on the Gdpr and have achieved something. I am thinking of the one-stop shop, for which if, for example, an Italian citizen has a data problem with Facebook or Google, he should contact the national authority, which then invests, in this case, the Irish one, where the two companies have the head office in Europe. A definite advantage for companies and inconvenience to citizens. It is the only critical point of the Gdpr. Overall, large data managers now have more constraints. The regulation can make the difference. How? For example, through the ability of enforcement by the European Authorities, who can go and see if, for example, Facebook really does what it is asked. Let&#39;s go to his house. This in perspective. We are at today: please tell me two facts that confirm the effectiveness of the regulation. The notification of data breach, growing exponentially, and the fact that not only the managers of large platforms have begun to change their policies, but in the world there are 120 countries that have adopted or are adopting laws along the lines of the European regulation. The eight-month grace period is about to end. What have you done and what will you change? We have tried to create a stronger awareness of the new rules. Now the inspections will start with the collaboration of the Guardia di Finanza. We will move according to the criterion: first the large numbers and the most important sectors. In the public, for example, we will monitor how Spid and large databases are working. In the private sector, the major credit institutions, those who do profiling with large-scale loyalty systems, those who deal with health data. Will European rules serve to put an end to the accumulation of information by Big Data? It is the only tool. Data protection also becomes a powerful lever in favor of competition, against information held by few. In this regard, we must work hard to have a &quot;privacy shield&quot; with China. It may not be that we demanded it from the United States and instead hand over our information freely to China without worrying about their fate. The European elections are upon us. Is there a risk of a new Cambridge Analytica? The EU rules require greater vigilance by national authorities and platform managers, who have committed themselves in this direction. And even in this case the penalties are heavy. Speaking of sanctions, has Rousseau paid 50,000 euros? After an unnecessarily controversial reaction, they undertook to implement the corrective measures on schedule and paid by renouncing the opposition with the ordinary judge.