
Complain about lack of insight
Published 18-06-2019
Decision
Private companies
In a specific case, it was not contrary to the rules that the Metro Service refused to give a passenger insight into television surveillance footage. The decision must be seen as a concrete justified departure from the starting point of the right of access for a registered person. Journal number 2018-832-0009
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has dealt with a complaint in which a traveler has complained about Metro Service's refusal of the complainant's request for access to television surveillance footage from the person in question.
On June 11, 2019, the Data Inspectorate decided on the case. In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, in the specific case there was no basis for overriding Metro Services' assessment that an exception to the right of access to section 22 (2) of the Data Protection Act. 2. In this case, paragraphs 2 (3) and 4 (4) applied. The decision must be viewed as a concrete justified departure from the starting point of the right of access for a data subject.
In the case in question, Metro Service had stated that insights into television surveillance footage may reveal the location of cameras and any blind spots, and therefore there is a real risk of compromising the security of the subway. The Metro Service had, after a specific assessment, found that the interests of the data subject in this case had to give way to crucial considerations of public interest, including the concern for public safety and / or prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal acts or enforcement of criminal sanctions. , including protection against public safety.
In the assessment, Metro Service emphasized that complainants had not stated a specific reason for their interest in gaining insight, for example by (part of) the recordings showing a matter of special importance, e.g. a fall accident, assault, theft or the like.
On the basis of the specific circumstances of the case, the Data Inspectorate found that Metro Services' handling of the request for insight in the specific case did not contravene the rules in Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation and Section 22 of the Data Protection Act.
Decision
The Data Protection Authority hereby returns to the case where on 29 November 2018 you complained to the Supervisory Authority of Metro Service A / S 'refusal of your request for access pursuant to Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation.
1. Decision
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that the processing did not violate Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation [i] and Section 22 of the Data Protection Act [ii]. Therefore, the Data Inspectorate finds no basis for criticizing Metro Service.
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
It appears from the case that you have requested the Metro Service for insight into television surveillance footage from your journey by metro on Saturday, November 24, 2018 on the train from Vestamager shortly after 6 p.m. 17.59 until Kongens Nytorv.
In addition, it appears that Metro Service has denied you the request for access to the television surveillance footage concerned.
2.1. Your comments
You have generally stated that, because of the extensive television surveillance in the area of ​​the metro, you have requested access to TV surveillance footage recorded on the journey in question. You have also stated that, as a regular user of the subway, you have a special interest in knowing what personal information is collected about you when you use the subway. In addition, the quality of television surveillance footage and where television surveillance is of interest to you.
You have further stated in this connection that there is a public interest in gaining insight into the material, as you, through collaboration with journalists, want to gain insight into the quality of Metro Service's television surveillance footage, including whether the quality is sufficient to identify people .
2.2. Metro Services comments
Metro Service has generally stated that the company is subject to a number of security requirements in connection with the operation of the metro in Copenhagen, and in this connection carries out television monitoring of all the company's stations and trains. The purpose of television monitoring is, inter alia, to prevent or clarify criminal acts of any kind.
Metro Service has stated that television surveillance is based on a legal obligation based on a security concern in connection with a large, public and freely available driverless transport system, which has approx. 60 million passengers, and serving significant traffic hubs in Denmark, including Nørreport station and Kastrup Airport.
In this connection, Metro Service has stated that there is a real risk of compromising the security of the metro if insights are to be given to television surveillance in the metro area. Insight into television surveillance footage could reveal the location of cameras and any blind spots, which is why, for security reasons, the company does not intend to give you insight into the footage.
In light of the above, Metro Service considers that the company may not respond to the request for access to the television surveillance footage in the area of ​​the metro, cf. section 22 (2) of the Data Protection Act. 2, Nos. 3 and 4.
The Metro Service considers that the interest of the data subject in this case must give way to the overriding consideration of the public safety of the passengers using the metro. In assessing the company, the company emphasized that you did not provide a specific reason why the balance between your interest in gaining access to the information outweighs the public safety considerations, for example by (part of) the admissions show a relationship of particular importance to you, e.g. a fall accident, assault, theft or the like.
3. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
In principle, data subjects have the right to obtain the data controller's confirmation of whether personal data relating to the data subject is processed and, where appropriate, access to personal data and a number of additional information in accordance with Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation.
A data controller may refuse to grant a request for access from a data subject if one of the exceptions to the right of access can be invoked pursuant to Article 15 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4, or section 22 of the Data Protection Act.
This is stated in section 22 (2) of the Data Protection Act. 2, paragraphs 3 and 4, inter alia, that exceptions to Article 15 of the Regulation can be made if the data subject's interest in knowing the information should be found to give way to decisive public interest considerations, including public security considerations and / or prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offenses or enforcement of criminal sanctions, including protection against public safety.
It follows from section 22 (2). 2, that in assessing an exception to the right of access pursuant to Article 15 of the Regulation, a concrete balance of the conflicting interests must be made.
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is no basis for overriding Metro Services' assessment that the interest in your interest in gaining access to the recordings, in this situation, should be found to give way to decisive public safety considerations. Thus, the Data Inspectorate finds that Metro Services' processing of personal data has not been in violation of the rules in Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation and Section 22 of the Data Protection Act.
The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized what Metro Service stated that insights into the television surveillance footage could reveal the location of cameras and any blind spots, which poses a risk of compromising public safety. In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that you are not seen to have stated such a special reason for your interest in gaining insight into the recordings, for example by (parts of) the recordings showing a matter of special importance to you, e.g. . a fall accident.

[i] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[ii] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act)
