THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

April 9, 2019

Transparency protects freedom of science
LfDI Stefan Brink calls for more transparency in third-party funding from
Universities in Baden-Wuerttemberg

The Society for Freedom Rights (GFF) published on March 14, 2019 the of
her commissioned report "University Industrial Cooperation, Access to Information and Freedom of Science" by Prof. dr. Klaus F. Gärditz, owner of the
Chair of Public Law at the Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität
Bonn. Its conclusion is: "Cooperation between universities and industry jeopardizes the freedom of science and information".
The report examines the cooperation agreements of the University of Mainz
The Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation, the Institute of Molecular Biology gGmbH
(IMB) 100 million euros over a period of 10 years
provides. In exchange for this injection of cash, Boehringer Ingelheimer allowed himself a broad say in concrete research and employment. The University of Mainz had refused until the last,
to disclose the cooperation agreements. Professor Gärditz and the Society for Freedom Rights see it as a violation of the freedom of information.
Like many other freedom of information laws, the Land Information Freedom Law of Baden-Württemberg (LIFG) sees an exception to comprehensive transparency for institutions charged with the task of independent scientific research
and colleges, as far as research, art, teaching, performance appraisals and
Exams are affected. The legislature justifies this exception by stating that "the regulation preserves the freedom of art and of science. Enjoy this
Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

- secured by Article 5 (3) Basic Law or Article 20 (1) LV -
high protection. "(L-Reg LT-Drs. 15/7720, 5).
If one looks at the regulation of the state university law (§ 41a LGH BW) to it
once more, it is striking that transparency is not far away. Access to
In fact, only the Rectorate and
the Senate of the respective university and the Ministry of Science within the framework of legal supervision. The submitted report makes it clear that limited transparency, especially in this area, jeopardizes the freedom of scholarship
and does not strengthen.
Therefore, the State Representative for Freedom of Information, Dr. Stefan Brink, the
Global exemption in favor of largely non-transparent third-party financing and
Delete research cooperation from the LIFG and replace it with science-specific exemptions. This serves both to protect the freedom of scholarship and to strengthen the necessary transparency of any promotion of higher education.

If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
