
SKAT's use of illegally obtained information
Published 17-05-2018
Decision
Public authorities
J.nr. 2018-32-0065
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that SKAT processes information on complaints in violation of section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, which the Authority finds to be questionable.
The Data Inspectorate has also decided that SKAT, cf. section 37 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, shall delete the information in question, which is processed in contravention of section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. First
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
1. Case making
It appears from the case that [complaints over a number of years] have been the subject of criminal investigation as suspected of tax fraud. [...]
As part of the investigation, the police intercepted the complainant's telephone […], just as the police […] conducted searches and seized a number of documents.
SKAT received […] ongoing information from SØIK about complaints for use in assessing the complainant's tax liability and calculation of the complainant's taxable income.
SØIK filed a complaint in the criminal case against complaints […]. However, SKAT maintained […], and the tax case is still pending before the National Tax Court.
By letter […] to the Swedish Tax Appeals Board, complainants objected to SKAT's treatment of the information received by SKAT in connection with SØIK's criminal investigation.
By letter […], SKAT made a statement to the Swedish Tax Appeals Board stating that SKAT finds the objection unjustified.
At an office meeting […] at the Tax Appeals Board, complaints again raised objections to SKAT's processing of the information that SKAT received from SØIK.
The National Tax Court has therefore decided […] that the question whether the information in question can be included in the proceedings is not separated for separate treatment and that the National Tax Court will therefore decide this matter simultaneously with the main question of the tax case; [...].
Complainants have [subsequently] requested SØIK to cause the information in question to be destroyed, including material submitted to SKAT.
SØIK decided on […] these issues and agreed with complaints that a number of information that was still in SØIK's possession should be destroyed.
However, SØIK further stated in the decision that while SØIK may decide on its own continued retention of information from the completed criminal case, it does not appear to be legal for SØIK to dispose of or request the return of material submitted to SKAT for use in SKAT's case management.
The complainant has subsequently referred this matter to the Copenhagen City Court.
The City of Copenhagen has rejected […] the complainant's request that SØIK be required to have the material delivered to SKAT destroyed for the following reason:
"According to section 746 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 1, the court settles disputes about the legality of police investigative action.
SØIK does not deny that after the prosecution has filed, the part of the material that was in SØIK's possession must be destroyed, which also happened. SØIK has informed SKAT of SØIK's decision […] on the destruction of the material in SØIK's possession.
The court notes that transcripts of intercepts of conversations between [complainant] and [complainant's] lawyer are illegally obtained material, cf. 2, like correspondence, etc. between [complainant] and [complainant] attorneys cannot be searched, cf. 3, or seized, cf. section 802 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4. On the basis of the information available, the court assumes that the question of the legality of these interventions / continued storage of this material has not been brought before the court by the [complainant's] defense under section 746 (2) of the Code of Procedure. 1, while the case has been under investigation and before prosecution was abandoned.
Collection of the remaining parts of the disputed material as part of the investigation was legal, and that part of the investigated material was legally handed over to the tax authorities for use in the case.
The illegally obtained material has now been destroyed by SØIK together with the legally obtained material.
This case only relates to the question of SØIK's duty to make the material delivered to SKAT etc. as mentioned in the claim, destroyed.
The Court does not consider that the issue of SØIK's duty to destroy the material submitted to SKAT can be regarded as "disputes over the legality of the police investigation," which is why the court is not authorized to decide on this issue.
The question of whether, after giving up the prosecution, SKAT is entitled to retain the material and legally use it or parts thereof, must be decided in a case against SKAT, cf. also the principle in the Order of the Eastern Lands of 20 October 2005 as reproduced in U. 2006.396.
The comment on Section 9 of the Legal Security Act (compulsory intervention) cannot lead to another result.
[Complainant's] request is therefore rejected. "
The Eastern District Court has […] upheld the district court's result and reasoning.
Complainants have subsequently […] complained to the Data Inspectorate about SKAT's processing of the information that SKAT received from SØIK.
In particular, the complaint relates to the following categories of information: (1) intercepts of interlocutors between the complainant and his attorney; and (2) letters, notes, draft contracts, etc. exchanged between the complainant and his attorney, and which the police have found by searching.
1.1. Complainant's comments
Complaints include stated that the collection of the information mentioned above is illegal, cf. 2, § 794 (2). 3, § 802 (2). 4, § 803 (2). 2 and § 804 (2). 4th
The prohibitions on the collection of the information in question are not merely an administrative practice, a circular, or an executive order. The prohibitions on the collection of the information in question are a direct expression of a fundamental principle of legal certainty, which is why the rule cannot be bent or have exceptions in the administration of justice.
Furthermore, the prohibitions on the collection of the information in question are reinforced by the obligation to immediately destroy such information, cf. Third
Complainants have further stated that section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, requires that information be processed in accordance with good data processing practices.
In this connection, the complainant refers to the commented Personal Data Act [1], p. 192, which states that good data processing practices (inter alia) imply a requirement that data processing must be fair and legal.
In the complainant's opinion, the provision must first and foremost have the effect that the original collection must be legal. It must therefore be assumed that the collection of information in contravention of the Code of Procedure must necessarily mean that the collection itself is in violation of section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. First
Furthermore, any subsequent processing of the illegally collected information must also contravene section 5 (5) of the Personal Data Act. First
Thus, it is the complainant's clear assessment that the processing of information collected directly in violation of the principles of legal certainty enshrined in the Administration of Justice Act can never ever be compatible with section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, irrespective of any tax law, legal certainty, administrative law, personal data law or similar that SKAT may provide as a basis for processing the information.
In this connection, the complainant states that an acceptance that SKAT can legally process the information in question despite the illegal collection will be a circumvention of both the Administration of Justice and the Personal Data Act. In that case, we will be in the absurd situation that collecting information in violation of laws and legal principles can be passed on until the inherited legal disputes of the information are sufficiently diluted.
Finally, the complainant states that if an objection is justified, it follows from section 35 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 2 that the processing may no longer include the information in question.
Complaints have referred to the commented personal data law, p. 521, which states that an objection to the processing of personal data will of course be justified if the processing is not legal, ie. takes place in violation of the rules of the Personal Data Act or other legislation.
Furthermore, section 37 of the Personal Data Act requires that the data controller must correct, delete or block information that appears to be incorrect or misleading or similarly processed in contravention of law. The complainant is of the opinion that the information is being processed in contravention of law and that the complainant's objection on this basis is justified.
Since the mere retention of the information itself is a treatment in violation of law, the only meaningful consequence of SKAT having never been able to legally receive - and subsequently process - such information must be that SKAT must delete the information.
1.2. SKAT's remarks
SKAT has, among other things, stated that SKAT processes information on complaints in connection with the assessment of the complainant's tax liability and calculation of the complainant's taxable income, and that SKAT's treatment is fully or partially covered by the scope of the Personal Data Act.
SKAT has […] continuously received information from SØIK regarding complaints.
The information is received:

In paper form. To the extent that SKAT has used information from this material, the information is available electronically via SKAT's proposals / decisions and case preparation. SKAT's decisions, case files and the documents drawn up by SKAT are all available electronically, while other appendices to the decisions are only partially available electronically, as SKAT's then-record-keeping system was not able to store such large amounts of data.
Electronic. This information is stored electronically at SKAT.

SKAT states that in the present case it can be assumed that the police have continuously exchanged material with SKAT in accordance with section 28 of the current Public Administration Act, and from 1 July 2009 pursuant to sections 6-8 of the Personal Data Act. cf. section 31 (1) of the Public Administration Act. 1. The material was exchanged for use by SKAT's tax assessment of complaints.
It is the authority in possession of confidential information that must determine whether the conditions and, therefore, the obligation to disclose the information are present, cf. section 31 (3) of the Public Administration Act. 1. In this case, the police have considered that it was justified to exchange the material with SKAT.
Thus, SKAT has legally received the material from the police in accordance with the rules of the Public Administration Act and the Personal Data Act on the exchange of confidential material between authorities.
Furthermore, SKAT is of the opinion that SKAT's handling of tax cases is governed by the official maxim and rules laid down in the Tax Administration Act, the Tax Control Act and the Legal Security Act. The special rules of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the area of ​​criminal justice do not apply to SKAT's handling of tax cases.
It follows from the official principle that the consideration of the best possible information about the case as well as the reason for obtaining the substantive right decision means that evidence obtained by the police and subsequently legally passed to SKAT can be used in a tax case. Thus, there are no judgments or judgments, according to which authorities in civil cases have been barred from using material legally possessed by the authority.
Finally, SKAT is of the opinion that neither the Code of Civil Procedure, the Personal Data Act nor the Specific Law regulate whether an evidence obtained in a manner involving a crime against anyone can be transferred, either to the other party, over for a public authority or before the courts.
The Tax Appeals Board has […] presented a draft decision in the specific case. It is clear from the draft decision that it is in accordance with the official principle that SKAT should include the information in the case, since the information is unquestionably passed on to SKAT.
2. Legal basis
According to section 1 (1) of the Act, the Personal Data Act [2] applies. 1, for the processing of personal data which is wholly or partly processed by electronic data processing and for non-electronic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register.
The term "register", according to section 3 (3) of the Personal Data Act, means any structured collection of personal data that is available according to certain criteria, whether this collection is located centrally, decentralized or distributed on a functional or geographical basis.
The specific comments on the provision [3] state:
“Included in the provision's register concept are manual registers, such as records, file boxes, journal card systems and other collections of manual material, which are stored structured according to certain criteria regarding persons to facilitate access to the personal data contained. By contrast, manual files that are part of the data controller's specific case management, files with case files or collections of such folders are not covered by the register concept. "
Information processing must always be done in accordance with the basic principles found in section 5 of the Personal Data Act.
According to section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, information must be processed in accordance with good data processing practices.
Of the special comments on section 5 (1) of the Act. 1 [4], it appears, inter alia, following:
“The provision stipulates that the data controller must process information in accordance with good data processing practices. It states that the treatment must be fair and legal. Fair processing of information requires, inter alia, that registered persons can become aware of the existence of a treatment and, when obtaining information from them, can obtain accurate and complete information regarding the details of the collection referred to hereunder. 38 of the preamble to the Directive [5]. Furthermore, it must be left to the supervisory authority to fulfill the legal standard "good data processing practice". "
In accordance with the Danish Data Protection Agency's practice, the principle of good data processing practice means, inter alia, that a processing that is contrary to legislation other than the Personal Data Act will also not be legally possible under the Personal Data Act.
According to section 35 of the Personal Data Act, the data subject may at any time object to the data controller for the processing of information about the person in question. In accordance with paragraph 2 of the provision. 2. If the opposition pursuant to subsection 2 1 is justified, no longer include the information in question.
Among other things, the preparers for the provision [6] state that an objection will of course be justified if the treatment is not legal.
According to section 37 of the Personal Data Act, the data controller must correct, delete or block information that appears to be incorrect or misleading or similarly processed in contravention of law or regulations issued under law if a registered person makes a request to do so.
The special comments on the provision [7] show, inter alia, following:
“A request for rectification, deletion or blocking must come from the data subject or his agent. The request must include information about the registered self. Thus, the data controller is not obliged to make corrections etc. upon request. of information about other persons. However, it will be the responsibility of the data controller to investigate the accuracy of such inquiries, cf. 4th
There is no formal requirement for the data subject's requests under the provision. If a request is made, it is for the data controller or his representative to decide as soon as possible whether the request can be granted and, where appropriate, to rectify, delete or block it. Whether information that proves to be incorrect or misleading or similarly processed in contravention of the law must be corrected, deleted or blocked must be determined on the basis of the specific circumstances. However, in some situations this may be due to, among other things, the law states that a specific correction method must be used under specified circumstances. This is the case, for example, with regard to the rule in section 221 of the Code of Procedure on the extent to which the courts can correct decisions. It is presumed that such special rules precede the proposed provision. There is thus no obligation to rectify, delete or block in cases where otherwise - for special reasons - is otherwise provided for in the legislation. It should be noted that such a scheme is compatible with Article 12 (b) of the Directive, citing the term 'as appropriate'.
The correction methods contained in the provision correspond essentially to the current register legislation, cf. hereby the Act on Public Registers Section 11 and the Act on Private Registers Sections 5 and 6. The correction method blocking is, however, an innovation. Blocking information means that retained information is still allowed, whereas processing and use of information, including in particular disclosure to third parties, is not allowed. Information that is blocked must therefore be marked so that a user is informed about the blocking. The fact that processed information is blocked does not prevent the data controller from processing the information that is necessary for the data controller to fulfill a duty of disclosure which is incumbent on him, eg. according to the legislation. Thus, the fact that information is blocked will not prevent a managing authority from granting third parties access to the blocked information pursuant to the rules of the Public Administration and Public Law. If necessary, it is assumed that third parties are informed that the information is blocked and why this has happened. "
Report of the Register Committee's Report No. 1345/1997 on the Processing of Personal Data, p. following:
"Article 12 (b) of [Directive 95/46 / EC] provides that the data subject must be guaranteed the right of the data controller to obtain information which has not been processed in accordance with the Directive, corrected, deleted, or blocked, especially if they are incomplete or incorrect.
It does not appear that the method of correction should be used in cases where information has not been processed in accordance with the provisions of the Directive. This must be determined on the basis of the circumstances of the specific case, where it is essential that the interests of the data subject be fully restored as far as possible. "
In Case C-131/12 Google Spain SL, the European Court of Justice expressed its opinion on the interpretation of Article 12 (b) of the Data Protection Directive. following:
'As regards Article 12 (b) of Directive 95/46, it provides that Member States shall ensure that any registered right to the data controller, in the circumstances, has been rectified, deleted or blocked from information which has not been processed in accordance with this Directive. , especially if they are incomplete or incorrect. As the latter clarification of a case in which certain requirements of Article 6 (1) of Regulation (EC) No 407/2008 apply. Article 95 (1) (d) [on data quality] of Directive 95/46 has not been complied with, is a non-exhaustive example, it follows that the non-compliance with the directive in the processing, which for the data subject may trigger the right, Article 12 (b) of the Directive may also result from non-compliance with other conditions of legality imposed by the Directive on the processing of personal data.
In this connection, it should be noted that, subject to the exceptions allowed under Article 13 of Directive 95/46, any processing of personal data must be carried out in accordance with both the principles of the reliability of the information provided for in Article 6 of the Directive and one of the principles relating to the basis for processing information listed in Article 7 of the Directive […].
Under Article 6, and subject to the Member States being able to lay down rules on processing for historical, statistical or scientific purposes, it is for the controller to ensure that the personal data is 'processed in a fair and lawful manner' that they are collected for explicitly stated and legitimate purposes. purposes, and that subsequent processing thereof is not incompatible with those purposes ', that they are' relevant and sufficient and do not include more than what is required to fulfill the purposes for which they are collected and for the purposes , to which they are subsequently processed 'that they are' correct and, if necessary, up-to-date ', and finally that they' must not be stored in a way that allows the data subjects to be identified for a longer period of time than is necessary for the sake of for the purposes for which they are collected or for which they are processed at a later date '. In this context, the controller must take all reasonable steps to erase or correct any information that does not meet the requirements of this provision. "(Emphasis added) [8]
The official principle referred to by SKAT is stated in "Administrative Law" by Niels Fenger (ed.) [9], p. 484 inter alia:
“It is a fundamental unwritten principle in administrative law that it is up to each managing authority either to provide the information necessary to decide a case correctly or to cause others to contribute to the case. This principle is usually referred to as the "official maxim", also called the "official principle" and "the principle of inquiry". [...]
The official maxim has three aspects. The first is a definition of the framework of the case. […] The second aspect concerns the degree of certainty of evidence required before the managing authority can decide the case. […] The third aspect of the official maxim relates to the distribution of the obligation between the party and the authority to provide, in practical terms, the information necessary to obtain the necessary proof of proof. "
Page 495 of the book shows how to obtain the necessary information, as follows:
“The regulation of this will often be partly in the legislation under which the case must be decided. However, the special regulation is almost always supplemented by the general rules on case information, which follow from the official maxim, the Administrative Law, the [Personal Data Act] and possibly the law enforcement authority's processing of personal data. ”
The relationship between the Public Administration Act and the Personal Data Act appears in Report of the Register Committee 1345/1997 on processing of personal data, p. following:
“The draft law thus - like the Act on public authorities' registers - expresses a special regulation in relation to the Public Administration Act. To the extent that this is the disclosure of information covered by the draft law, the question of its justification will therefore have to be assessed in accordance with the rules of the draft law. Where appropriate, justification would have to be assessed in accordance with the rules in Chapter 4 of the draft law on the data controller's access to process, including disclosing, personal data. "
Of the general remarks section. 4.2.11.2. similar to the Personal Data Act [10], for example:
"The committee's draft new legislation in this area is thus based on the premise that - just like the Act on Public Authorities' Regulations - this is a special regulation in relation to the rules of the Public Administration Act and the Public Act."
It is further stated in the commentary on the Administrative Law [11] that:
“The Administration Act contains a statute of minimum requirements regarding the most fundamental rights of a party to an administrative case. In this connection, the provisions of the Public Administration Act are supplemented, in particular, by the Personal Data Act and by the Law on Legal Security in the administration's use of compulsory intervention and disclosure obligations. "
The above view on the inclusion of the Personal Data Act in connection with the determination of the withdrawal of the official principle is also seen in an opinion of the Parliamentary Ombudsman [12]. has stated. to:
“[Managing authorities] are subject to the unlawful principle called the official principle (or the investigative principle) which is a very basic principle that applies with the force of law in Danish administrative law. According to the official principle, it is for each managing authority itself, possibly in cooperation with other authorities, to provide the information needed in a case in order for the authority to make a legal and substantive substantive and correct decision. The official principle is supplemented by special rules on case information in various areas, eg. the Tax Control Act rules.
In addition, in this case, the [authority's] collection of information is regulated by the Personal Data Act. [...]
The requirement of legality in section 5 of the Personal Data Act must, in my opinion, be understood in the same way as the general administrative law requirements for case processing. In relation to case information, these requirements of the official principle may be supplemented by special disclosure rules in the legislation and the requirement of relevance.
I have not examined what specific information [the authority] has collected […], and thus in my investigation I have not determined whether [the authority] has complied with section 5 of the Personal Data Act. ”
3. Opinion of the Data Inspectorate
The Data Inspectorate assumes - after the matter has been considered at a meeting of the Data Council - that the Personal Data Act applies to the processing of information that is available electronically in SKAT's proposals for decisions, final decisions, case making, etc., cf. section 1 of the Act, PCS. First
It should be noted that processing of information found at SKAT in paper form, in the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, constitutes manual case files and is thus not covered by the scope of the Personal Data Act, cf. section 1 (1) of the Act. 1 and § 3 (3).
The Data Inspectorate further finds that it On the basis of the municipal and national court orders […] it can be assumed that the information was provided by SØIK in violation of the Code of Civil Procedure.
As mentioned above under cl. 2 it is the Danish Data Protection Agency's practice that the principle of good data processing means that a treatment that is contrary to legislation other than the Personal Data Act will also not be legally possible under the Personal Data Act.
In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, there are no grounds for making a different assessment in the present case and thus depart from the practice of the supervision. The fact that it is not TAX, but SØIK, which has collected the information in contravention of the Administration of Justice Act, cannot, in the opinion of the Supervisory Board, lead to another result, as it would be possible to circumvent, inter alia, tax. the Judicial Code and the Judicial Security Act in connection with the collection of certain information.
In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, on the basis of the clear declarations in the preparers for the Personal Data Act, which must also be found in the section under section. 2, the opinion of the Parliamentary Ombudsman, it is assumed that the rules of the Personal Data Act define the official principle so that, in connection with the disclosure of the case, managing authorities have both the right and the obligation to provide the necessary information to decide a case correctly, however, so that a managing authority's treatment of personal data in connection with the decision must be made in the framework of the Personal Data Act.
It is thus the Data Inspectorate's assessment that SKAT's processing of the information is contrary to section 5 (5) of the Personal Data Act. 1, which the Authority finds to be questionable.
4. The Danish Data Protection Agency's decision pursuant to Sections 35 and 37 of the Personal Data Act
In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, a treatment that is in breach of section 5 of the Personal Data Act does not fulfill the conditions of the law's processing and is thus contrary to the law.
For this reason, the complainant's objection is, in the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, justified, cf. the comments on section 35 of the Personal Data Act.
The Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that section 37 of the Data Protection Act (which implements Article 12 (b) of the Data Protection Directive) applies not only to information that is incorrect or misleading, but also to information processed in contravention of others the terms of the Personal Data Act.
Accordingly, the Data Inspectorate finds that the information in question, which appears in SKAT's proposals for decisions, final decisions, case preparation, etc., and which is processed in contravention of section 5 (1) of the Personal Data Act. 1, according to the circumstances of the case must be deleted, cf. section 37 (2) of the Personal Data Act. First
In doing so, the Danish Data Protection Agency has placed a decisive emphasis on the complete recovery of the complainants' interests as far as possible and that a blockage will not adequately address this.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that SØIK, as the authority that originally collected the information, was obliged by the Administration of Justice Act, immediately to become aware of the contents of the information, to destroy the information in question and that the information in question should therefore not be disclosed to TREASURE.
In a number of cases, the Data Inspectorate has decided on the issue of deleting or correcting incorrect or misleading information. In practice, the Data Protection Authority, as a general rule, with reference to the duty of note and record keeping in the Public Law, rejects the deletion of information and documents that are part of a complainant's case with a public authority.
However, the regular practice of the Data Protection Supervisor is of no decisive importance in the present case, since it is not incorrect or misleading information, but on the contrary information provided in contravention of the rules of the Code of Procedure. Thus, in the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, there is no consideration to take into account the obligation to record under the Public Act.
The Data Inspectorate therefore considers that SKAT must delete the information in question in SKAT's proposals for decisions, final decisions, case making, etc. SKAT is requested to inform the Data Inspectorate within 6 weeks from today that deletion has taken place.
As part of public administration, the Data Protection Authority is subject to the Public Administration Act, including the fundamental principles of administrative law.
Datatilsynet har således ved afgørelsen af sagen pligt til at lægge vægt på det faktum i sagen, som foreligger på afgørelsestidspunktet, og ikke på det faktum, som oprindeligt forelå. Det betyder, at tilsynets afgørelse er truffet i lyset af by- og landsrettens kendelser […]. Der henvises herved til ”Forvaltningsret” af Niels Fenger (red.), s. 494, hvoraf fremgår:
”Afhængigt af det relevante retsgrundlag må myndigheden i sådanne tilfælde sikre, at afgørelsen træffes på baggrund ikke af det faktum som oprindeligt forelå ved sagens start, men ud fra situationen, som denne ser ud ved sagens afgørelse, jf. FOB 2015-24 og U.2010.2049 V. Eventuelle klage- og tilsynsorganer må normalt træffe afgørelse på grundlag af de aktuelle faktiske forhold, og dette gælder, selv om disse har ændret sig i forhold til førsteinstansens afgørelsesgrundlag […]”
5. Concluding remarks
Det er i øvrigt Datatilsynets opfattelse, at tilsynets ovenstående vurderinger af SKATs behandling af de pågældende oplysninger, som der er foretaget i forhold til persondataloven, fortsat vil være aktuelle efter den 25. maj 2018, hvor databeskyttelsesforordningen finder anvendelse.
Datatilsynet afventer herefter SKATs underretning om, at de omhandlede oplysninger er slettet. Underretningen skal være tilsynet i hænde inden 6 uger fra dags dato.
Det bemærkes, at sagen har fået nyt journalnummer i Datatilsynet som følge af overgang til en ny journalperiode. SKAT bedes derfor henvise til det journalnummer, der er anført på nærværende brev.
Kopi af Datatilsynets afgørelse er dags dato sendt til klager og Landsskatteretten til orientering.

[1] Henrik Waaben og Kristian Korfits Nielsen, Lov om behandling af personoplysninger, 3. udgave (2015).
[2] Lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger med senere ændringer.
[3] Lovforslag nr. 147 fremsat den 9. december 1999 til lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger, de specielle bemærkninger til lovens § 3, nr. 3.
[4] Lovforslag nr. 147 fremsat den 9. december 1999 til lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger.
[5] Af præambelbetragtning nr. 38 fremgår, at ”enhver behandling af personoplysninger skal udføres rimeligt og lovligt i forhold til de registrerede.”
[6] Lovforslag nr. 147 fremsat den 9. december 1999 til lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger, de specielle bemærkninger til lovens § 35.
[7] Lovforslag nr. 147 fremsat den 9. december 1999 til lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger, de specielle bemærkninger til lovens § 37.
[8] C-131/12 Google Spain SL [2014], præmis 70-72.
[9] Niels Fenger (red.), Forvaltningsret, 1. udgave (2018).
[10] Lovforslag nr. 147 fremsat den 9. december 1999 til lov nr. 429 af 31. maj 2000 om behandling af personoplysninger.
[11] Niels Fenger, Forvaltningsloven med kommentarer, 1. udgave (2013), s. 54f.
[12] FOB 2011 15-1 om forvaltningsmyndigheders brug af oplysninger fra Facebook.
