GZ: DSB-D123.193 / 0003-DSB / 2018 dated 7.12.2018 [Note: Editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The Data Protection Authority decides on the data protection complaint of Adelheid A *** (Complainant) of 11 July 2018 against the N *** Wirtschaftsauskunftsdienst GmbH (Respondent) for infringement of the right to Deletion as follows: 1. The appeal is partially granted and it is stated that the Respondent thereby infringed the Appellant's right of cancellation by failing to meet the claim of € 497.07 already paid on 27 February 2013 deleted from their credit rating database. 2. The appeal is dismissed in respect of an alleged infringement of the right to cancellation in respect of the claim of EUR 481.34 paid on 15 April 2018 and the information contained in the applicant's database from the bankruptcy file (the Edict file). 3. The Respondent is instructed to comply with the complainant's cancellation request within a period of two weeks in case of other execution and to delete the data specified in item 1. Legal basis: § 24 para. 1 and 5 of the Data Protection Act - DSG, BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended; Art. 5 para. 1 lit. b, 6 para. 1 lit. f, 17 para. 1 lit. a and lit. d, 58 para. 2 lit. c of the General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR, OJ 1. Statement of reasons A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. By a letter of formal notice of 11 July 2018, the appellant alleged an infringement of the right to cancellation under Article 17 GDPR, essentially by doing so she submitted an application on 11 June 2018 for the cancellation of her personal data to the Respondent. As the listed data is no longer up-to-date, it requests that all credit-related data, with the exception of the name, date of birth and current home address, be deleted. She has repaid her debts as part of a payment plan to 100% and now wants to start economically - in the common sense from scratch. The Respondent replied by letter of 12 June 2018 stating that there was no indication as to the incorrectness of the registration or the inadmissibility of the processing in relation to the representations in question. According to the provisions of the GDPR, therefore, no deletion or correction of the data must take place. 2. By comment of 27 August 2018, the Respondent summarized that the complainant's "very curious" request for cancellation could only be understood as meaning that the personal data were for the purposes for which it was collected or otherwise processed Article 17 (1) (a) DSGVO) or the personal data would be processed unlawfully (Article 17 (1) (d) GDPR). Data protection law basis of the processing of credit-relevant personal data in the identity and creditworthiness database of the Respondent were predominantly legitimate interests pursuant to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO. The predominant legitimate interests here would be on the side of third parties, namely the companies of the banking industry that are in the preliminary stage. Basically, the Respondent stores personal data only for a legitimate purpose for its processing. Thus, as long as the data are relevant to the assessment of identity or creditworthiness, the purpose of the processing continues. The longer an entry in the payment history is in the past, the smaller the amount and the less other data on payment experience a person would have, the more likely it would be that the specific entry could not be used to derive credit-relevant statements. Also already settled ("positively settled") demands would represent credit-relevant data. The fact that a claim has only been settled after a qualified reminder or enforcement by debt collection agencies or lawyers would mean at least a temporary default on payment and thus result in a credit risk with regard to future legal transactions. In order to convey a factually correct and complete picture of the creditworthiness-relevant data stored to a person and thus to the principle of the data correctness after Art. 5 Abs. 1 lit. d DSGVO It is therefore important that already paid claims remain in the N *** database. The Respondent's stored payment history data was detailed by the Respondent: The claim for € 4,007.97 (origin: B *** Mobilfunk GmbH) was in the meantime noted as "positively settled" (= paid). On the basis of own extinguishing rules agreed with the claim creditor B *** Mobilfunk GmbH, this claim had meanwhile been canceled. In addition, there is still a claim for 481.34 euros (origin: C *** Inkasso Gesellschaft m.b.H.), which has also been confirmed in the meantime as "positively done". Likewise, there is a claim for 497.07 euros (origin: D *** Inkasso GmbH & Co KG), which also appears as "positively done" in the database. The last two claims would be subject to the Respondent's standard cancellation rules. This means that due to their considerable amount, the claims still have to be regarded as credit-relevant. Therefore, there is an upright processing purpose, which is why neither Art. 17 para. 2 lit. a still after lit. d DSGVO have to be deleted. Other reasons for deletion were not raised by the complainant and would not be available. By way of exception to § 256 para. 1 no. 4 IO, information stored in the edict file on a debt settlement procedure can still be viewed for one year from the end of the payment term provided for in the payment plan. According to Ediktsdatei, in the debt regulation procedure for AZ * 6 S * 4 / 13x, BG Humboldt, a payment plan with the end of the payment period on 15 April 2018 was decided. Thus, even in the edict file, which can not be viewed without obligation, the present debt regulation procedure can be called up until the end of April 15, 2019. This circumstance of public accessibility was in the balance of interests under Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO in any case: An interest that data, which could be retrieved by anyone online, should not be processed by the Respondent, was not recognizable. Even after the expiry of 15 April 2019, the processing purpose and legal basis for the data from the above-mentioned debt settlement proceedings were the same: a historical debt settlement procedure would also be a credit-relevant date for a certain period of time, since it would be possible to draw conclusions about future payment behavior from a person's previous financial situation , The Respondent agrees to save the Appellant only with her current registration address and correct date of birth and full name. The name "Adelheid Lina A ***" and date of birth * 3. * 1.19 ** are retained, as shown in the copy of the ID card sent by the complainant by letter dated 25 April 2018. The current registration address will be the one used in the ZMR. 3. The complainant has not commented on the further results of the preliminary investigation despite a request within the party hearing. B. Object of the complaint On the basis of the procedure described above, the subject of the complaint is the question of whether the Respondent breached the complainant's right to cancellation by completely rejecting the application for cancellation of the payment experience data (credit rating data). C. Determination of facts The Respondent operates an identity and credit rating database. The data is obtained from publicly available sources or is obtained from address publishers and payment experience information from a large number of corporate customers and from over 60 collection partners. By letter of 5 June 2018, the complainant requested that her personal data be deleted on the grounds that the data listed were no longer up-to-date because she had repaid her debts under a payment plan at 100%. She requested the deletion of all credit-related data, with the exception of her name, date of birth and her current home address. By letter dated 21 June 2018, the request for cancellation by the respondent was dismissed. The claim for 4,007.97 euros B *** Mobilfunk GmbH was deleted from the database of the Respondent. As of 22 August 2018, the following information about the complainant has been stored in the Respondent's database: [Editor's note: The printout of data from the Respondent's data processed as a scan at this point in the original can not be pseudonymised at a reasonable cost. It contains data, referred to as 'payment history data', two claims against the complainant of EUR 481.34 and EUR 497.07, respectively, recorded as 'positively settled', and detailed data on the debt settlement procedure implemented in the section 'judicial publications' Court published procedural matters. Furthermore, there are three sentences with name and address data as well as the date of birth of the complainant.] A debt settlement procedure concerning the complainant as debtor was announced on 28 January 2013 to the GZ * 6 S * 4 / 13x at the Humboldt district court. On April 24, 2013, the payment plan was legally confirmed and the debt settlement procedure was lifted. The end of the payment period was determined on 15 April 2018. The following entry can be seen in the edict file (last accessed on 6.12.2018): [Note editor: The printout of data from the edict file of the judicial system reproduced here as a scan can not be reproduced pseudonymised with justifiable effort.] Proof evaluation: Die Findings are based on the complainant's consistent submissions in their letters to the DPA and the attached documents. The findings concerning the data stored on the complainant in the data base of the Respondent are set out in the reply to the complainant's request for information by letter of 22 August 2018. It is also apparent from this information that the claim of EUR 4,007.97 is the B *** Mobilfunk GmbH in the database query of the Respondent is deleted. The appellant did not dispute the accuracy of the information and did not otherwise comment on it within the framework of the party hearing granted to her. The findings on which sources the Respondent receives its data from are derived from the "General Information and Processing Purposes", the Respondent. D. From a legal point of view: 1. In the present case, the appellant requested, pursuant to Article 17 (1) GDPR, the immediate deletion of her personal data, with the exception of her name, date of birth and current address for residence 2. The appellant's allegations that, on the one hand, due to the settled claim, on the one hand pursuant to Art. 17 para. 1 lit. a DSGVO the abolition of the purposes for which their personal data were collected and, on the other hand, the unlawful processing of their data by the Respondent pursuant to Art. 17 (1) lit. d DSGVO claims. 3. At the outset, it should be noted that the processing of data relevant to creditworthiness by a credit bureau within the meaning of Section 152 of the Trade Regulations is covered by this provision and the lawfulness of the processing of such data is therefore not dependent on the prior consent of a data subject. It can also be assumed that the legal basis of this activity is that the legislature starts from the basic admissibility of this commercial activity, so that it can give a legal power to process this data. Since the exercise of this commercial activity without collection, storage and disclosure of relevant data can not reasonably be imagined, it must also be assumed that the legislator in certain case categories a legitimate interest of those concerned interests of these traders in the use of data on "credit" as given (see also the recommendation of the Data Protection Commission of 7 May 2007, GZ K211.773 / 0009-DSK / 2007, see also OGH of 21 January 2015, GZ 17 Os 43 / 14y). 4. In the absence of special rules for credit bureaus, the general principles of the GDPR are applicable, according to which, among others, Personal data may only be collected for specified, unambiguous and legitimate purposes (Article 5 (1) (b) GDPR). Accordingly, it should first be noted in the present proceedings that the purposes of the data processing in the Respondent's database are to allow those undertakings access to the data which, in the course of their economic activity, incurs a credit risk, for example in the supply of their goods or services (eg Delivery on open account). Under certain conditions, the lawfulness of the processing according to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. to affirm DSGVO. 5. The subject of the proceedings, however, is the question of how long payment experience data can still be stored with the Respondent after settlement of the claim before it is no longer necessary for the purposes of processing (creditor protection); only if the personal data is still credit-relevant, is a processing purpose pursuant to Art. 5 para. 1 lit. b DSGVO. There is no statutory standard on how long entries in databases can be stored by credit bureaus. In the notification GZ K600.033-018 / 0002-DVR / 2007, the Data Protection Commission issued the "Small Credit Register (Consumer Credits) for the Purpose of Creditors Protection and Risk Minimization" on the legal situation prior to the entry into force of the GDPR with regard to the deletion of all entries in connection with a specific credit relationship, i.a. conditional that such must be made seven years after the extinguishment of the debt or the occurrence of another debt-discharging event. Finally, pursuant to Section 256 (1) of the Insolvency Act (IO), the data to be included in the edict file must be made public after the IO (insolvency file). Section 256 (2) IO further states that access to the insolvency file shall no longer be granted if one year has passed since: - the cancellation of the insolvency proceedings pursuant to §§ 123a, 123b and 139 (Z 1), - the Expiry of the payment period provided for in the recovery plan, if its fulfillment is not monitored (Z 2), - the termination or cessation of monitoring of the recovery plan (Z 3), - the expiration of the payment period provided for in the payment plan (Z 4) or - the early termination or Termination of the levy procedure (point 5). In addition, upon request of the debtor, access to the insolvency file is no longer to be granted even if the legally approved restructuring plan or payment plan has been fulfilled (Section 3 leg. Cit.). Pursuant to Section 256 (4) IO, access to the insolvency proceedings not opened for lack of cost - covering assets or insolvency pursuant to Article 68 is no longer to be granted three years after registration 5. A uniform standard from which a general deadline for the cancellation of the insolvency proceedings Credit-relevant data from the database of a credit bureau after repayment of debt results is not apparent. Rather, an individual case assessment, taking into account all relevant circumstances, seems necessary. The following circumstances can be decisive for the assessment: - the amount of the individual claims, - the "age" of the claims (thus the date of entry in the database), - the number of claims collected by a collection agency, since payment of a claim has expired. The origin of the data must also be considered. When processing information from a public registry, such as the bankruptcy file, in the credit bureau database, it will take into account how long that information must appear in the relevant public register and specific provisions may provide an indication of the retention period of the data. The allegedly bad creditworthiness of the persons concerned resulting from historical "payment experience data" (negative entries) should be kept away by the possibility of a timely deletion after settlement of all claims. In particular, it should be avoided that those persons who have regained a sound financial basis after the cancellation of a debt settlement procedure or after payment of their debts outside the insolvency proceedings will again encounter difficulties in the course of business, as their creditworthiness is diminished by these negative registrations. A general deletion of the credit-relevant data only seven years after the debt has been repaid will, in view of Art. 6 para. 1 lit. In any case, in view of the changed legal situation since the date on which the above-mentioned decision of the Data Protection Commission was issued (cf the cited provisions of the IO), it must not be proportionate. The Data Protection Authority is therefore obliged to refrain from its u.a. in the decision GZ K600.033-018 / 0002-DVR / 2007 on the "Small loan evidence (Consumer credit certificate) for the purpose of the creditor protection and the risk minimization" expressed right view to the retention period. 6. For the purposes of this case, this means that the complainant has two "payment history data" stored in the Respondent's database. These are claims in the amount of 481.34 euros and 497.07 euros, which appear as "positively done" in the database. The claims were opened in June and July 2010. The demand for 481.31 euros was closed on 15 April 2018; the second claim on 27 February 2013. In addition, the complainant's judicial debt settlement procedure, which reflects the information from the edict file, also appears in the database. However, the entries are not identical since the bankruptcy file does not contain a list of the individual claims ("payment experience data"). The negative entries on the exact amount of the claims do not come from the insolvency file of the federal government. To claim 1: The claim in the amount of 497.07 € was opened on 7 June 2010 and done positively on 27 February 2013. Although it is apparent from the case-file that the complainant had three entries from "payment experience data" in the Respondent's database, due to the small amount of the debt and the repayment of the debt over five years ago, it can not be assumed that the processing This data is still credit relevant and therefore for the legitimate interests of creditors are still of interest. In this case, it must be assumed that the processing is no longer necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of the creditors or that the complainant's interests or fundamental rights and freedoms prevail. As regards point 2: the claim amounting to € 481.34 also originates from the year 2010, but was only closed on April 15, 2018, thus with the cancellation of the debt settlement procedure, i. done positively. Therefore, with regard to this entry and the court publication in the bankruptcy file, it must be taken into account that according to § 256 para. 2 no. 4 IO cited above, access to the bankruptcy file is still possible until April 15, 2019, unless the Respondent disclaims the early cancellation requested from this. However, even if the complainant had requested the deletion from the bankruptcy file or the data was deleted from the public register on 15 April 2019, this does not automatically mean that this data must also be deleted from the Respondent's database. This already arises from the fact that the public announcement in the insolvency file is subject to different legal consequences, such as the legal validity of the opening of insolvency proceedings, the summons of creditors and the filing of claims and is not primarily oriented towards the protection of creditors for claims that have already been paid. Although the publicity of the bankruptcy file also serves the protection of creditors, it can not be disputed that even after the publication of the debt settlement procedure in the bankruptcy file, information about this can still be relevant to creditors in terms of creditor protection. In this case, too, it is up to the credit reporting agency to make an assessment as to whether these data still provide information on the creditworthiness of the data subject and thus that they can continue to be processed. It follows for the present proceedings that the negative registration in the amount of 481.34 Euro and the information from the edict file can still be left in the data base of the Respondent at the time of the decision. There is no reason to explain why the claim for EUR 481.34 should be canceled if it was not paid until April of this year, even though this claim is by no means "significant", as the respondent believes. Regarding point 3: Since the Respondent refused to cancel the claim already paid in February 2013 in the amount of € 497.07 (origin: D *** Inkasso GmbH & Co KG), the Respondent was in accordance with Art. 58 para lit. c DSGVO to comply with the complainant's request. It was therefore to decide according to the claim.
