Against revenge porn extend the warning Intervention by Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (&quot;Italia Oggi&quot;, 17 June 2019) For digital natives, the network represents not one of the many possible means of communication, but the prevailing dimension of existence. And the relationships woven online, sharing on social networks every more intimate fragment of life, the perception of the world increasingly mediated by algorithms impose new protection needs, in the face of the general inadequacy of the traditional categories of the right to regulate phenomena in continuous evolution, such as the technologies that shape them. The network is, of course, an extraordinary resource for growth and emancipation, especially for those who still have to train. But it is also the place where, in the illusion of anonymity, minors violate other minors. From hate speech to revenge pom, from cyberbullying to harassment of the most fragile, flaunted on the web with intolerable satisfaction. This is perhaps the most tragic aspect of the distorting use of the network, in the gap between the illusion of autonomy and the introjection of rules, the experience of freedom and the exercise of responsibility. And it is perhaps the most paradigmatic expression of the ambivalence of the digital and its dangerous misunderstandings. Violence on the net is much more accessible: because it does not suffer the immediate impact of the &quot;social sanction&quot; - even before legal - which instead (still) is subject to offline. It does not take ardor, even for the most sinister: the &quot;transition to action&quot; is much easier. Unfortunately, however, the consequences are even more devastating, because that violence tends to remain there forever, within the reach of anyone at any latitude; it has no end, it is omnipresent. On this some important safeguards have been introduced (but perhaps not adequately publicized) with the law on cyberbullying, which in the awareness of the complexity of the phenomenon, not reducible to a mere criminal issue, has combined prevention, protection of the victim, empowerment of the platforms, with the possibility, in the case of inertia (indeed infrequent), to appeal to the Guarantor (even by the minor over 14 years), to obtain the removal of the harmful content. Also the warning procedure is a useful tool to break the spiral of hatred underlying these behaviors and that, together with the particularly rapid protection before the Guarantor, could be extended to the revenge-pom: also an expression of a use of the network aimed at coerce, rather than promoting freedom. However, to really counteract these phenomena we must act on their deep, cultural and social causes: first of all the loneliness and digital immaturity of children increasingly abandoned without tools or support in front of a screen, unaware of the real and very concrete aspect of every click. The primary educational agencies, from school to family, must make it clear that the post is not written on the desk: it can remain on the net forever, visible and &quot;replicable&quot; by anyone, with a damaging potential which must be aware of. This is the most important frontier on which we all have to invest, with an educational alliance that also serves us adults to reflect on the viralization of resentment that a certain use of the network is likely to produce.