One year basic data protection regulation
The direction is right

Press release - page 1/4
Munich, 24.05.2019

On 25 May 2019, the General Data Protection Regulation becomes one year
old. Their effects are obvious and significant. They concern
Data processing in the European Union, but especially
also the perception of the need for data protection in Europe and beyond. Awareness of privacy
now penetrates the economy, administration and society. This is not least due to the data protection basic regulation.
The Basic Data Protection Regulation has brought improvements for the citizens. They now have extensive rights to assert themselves in the digital world. Affected parties must be informed comprehensively and appropriately. You have claims for information, rectification, cancellation including
the right to be forgotten and other rights to
especially with major digital companies their positions
and the power of disposition over their data
to keep. In its orientation towards humans, the General Data Protection Regulation is the expression of effective protection of fundamental rights.
The responsible persons are a certain and partly increased
Effort subjected. But in business and administration
many transparent, which data processing it at all
already there are how they are related and how optimization possibilities can be exploited. The General Data Protection Regulation brings benefits beyond data protection because it
to trigger a digital cash fall. It should not be kept secret
be that the basic data protection regulation is quite hard
and costs in business, administration and society
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 24/05/2019 - page 2/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

can. These efforts and costs are not all new, but
build on necessities already the old legal situation. Further developments are necessary to the dynamics of the
digital developments.
The independent data protection supervisory authorities of the federation and
The Länder are committed to the protection of fundamental rights and, in particular, support citizens in their fundamental right
Not only to have privacy, but also to enforce. This
has led to a significant increase in the regulatory burden on regulators
Work effort led. This increased workload is but
purposeful, because it serves the citizens. Despite tight resources, the regulators are in the first
Succeeded in reducing many uncertainties by providing comprehensive advice and information. Numerous individual cases could
successfully completed. Success here means safeguarding data protection and not giving priority to sanctions. However, the data protection supervisory authorities do not hesitate, in the
Case of violations of data protection law to impose effective sanctions and measures, if necessary.
The Basic Data Protection Regulation has been criticized at the beginning.
Many of these criticisms could be dispelled after
through factual information hysterical and excessive reactions were corrected. Some criticisms relate in the
Core to the question, which responsible persons which measures in
which form must implement. Small medium-sized enterprises of the manufacturing industry must meet the requirements
the General Data Protection Regulation as well as in principle
carry like the big digital companies. However, the Basic Regulation provides with its risk-based approach and
the necessary appropriateness of action possibilities
the differentiation. By acting on the supervisory authorities
in the application of the General Data Protection Regulation, which reduces legal uncertainty, starting points for criticism are reduced. But the law is laid down by lawmakers.

Press release dated 24/05/2019 - page 3/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

Also, soon after three years after the adoption of the General Data Protection Regulation, there are signs that many of those responsible have not yet fully implemented them. This is in
strong depending on the size of the institutions involved. While in the area of ​​large enterprises the implementation of the
Data protection basic regulation often organized as a project and
with targets and resources highlighted, this seems to be in
other areas to be rather punctual. The reasons
are different. In many cases, despite available materials and several advisory and information initiatives, it still seemed
Uncertainties regarding the necessary implementation measures. Especially in smaller business
and administrative units may have made limited resources necessary implementation processes difficult.However, the available findings also show that deficits
often did not result in view of new requirements of the basic data protection regulation, but apparently already existed in times of the old legal situation. The implementation and sanction pressure associated with the General Data Protection Regulation
makes these however now recognizable.
The same applies to the obligation to report data breaches; also here is
can not be assumed that the number of incidents with the
Has significantly increased the basic data protection regulation. The enormous
Increase in the reporting of data glitches less like one
actually increased number of incidents, rather than as well
have been caused by imminent sanctions, but also by the much stricter requirements for legal reporting. Overall, the increased perception of data protection requirements by the General Data Protection Regulation
led to an increased activity. More responsible people do a lot
more than before May 25, 2018. But not everyone is doing enough.
After one year, the General Data Protection Regulation gets into calmer waters. It goes in the right direction and in the concrete application and the formulation of their requirements
It becomes clear that a variety of leeway is meaningfully used

Press release dated 24/05/2019 - page 4/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

can. In this way, the data protection supervisory authorities of the Federation and the Länder want and will be the citizens
Continue to accompany citizens. The goal is and remains freedom in the digital
Secure world.

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
