press release
711.401.1
May 23, 2019
Maja Smoltczyk: Europe is the way - go vote!
The coming weekend is all about Europe. On Saturday, the party celebrates
European General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GMO) her first birthday and only one
Day after tomorrow, the election to the European Parliament takes place. Against this background remembers
The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information, Maja Smoltczyk, remembered that it
The European Parliament was under tremendous strain and many times over
Efforts of lobby groups the DS-GVO negotiated, decided and the citizens
Europe's citizens have thus the chance to their rights even in a globalized world
defend. Thus it has an impressive commitment to preserving the elemental
Fundamental right to privacy.
The developments in the first year of the DS-GVO show that people are very intensively affected by the
Guaranteed rights exercise in it. EU-wide are the complaints about
Data breaches have increased enormously; in Berlin has the complaint
more than tripled. But also in companies, the awareness of data protection
gone up. Since then, the number of data breaches reported in Berlin has increased fourfold. The
Start-up office hours of the Berlin data protection officer has shown that Berlin
Companies have discovered privacy as a competitive advantage. Because in many
Regions of the world, national data protection laws are now in line with the standards of
DS-GMO adapted.
The DS-GVO was a first necessary step to our rights of personality and liberty
in a time of global digitalization. Digitization has begun in
held almost all areas of life. Many developments can improve our lives,
At the same time, however, they pose significant dangers to our free and democratic
Society. Quasi-monopolies of large data groups mean that people,
but also companies and state institutions more and more in their dependence
advised and fair competition is hindered. More and more often prepare algorithms
Make decisions about people or even meet them yourself
For the most part, they are completely non-transparent.
The growing danger of manipulated opinion-forming processes is also very serious
or political elections. This shows further need for regulation.
Maja Smoltczyk: "The DS-GVO is an example of how global challenges our
Be met in a democratic way and across national borders
can. Faced with these immense challenges that our increasingly digitized
Society, we need a strong Europe and, in particular, a strengthened and
a viable European Parliament, which is the path for the citizens
and European citizens with courage and energy. Europe is the way - we should all take it
go on sunday! "

Responsible: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 0
Fax: 030 2155050
