Nordic data protection authorities continue their close cooperation
On 6-7 May 2019, the Nordic data protection authorities (DPAs) from Denmark, the Faeroe Islands,
Finland Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Åland met in Stockholm for their annual Nordic Data
Protection Meeting.
In line with a long standing tradition, the Nordic DPAs met to discuss data protection matters and a
close Nordic cooperation. Now that one year with the GDPR has passed, these discussions were more
concrete and important than ever and focussed especially on joint strategies in enforcement and EU
cooperation and information sharing.
The Nordic DPAs had a valuable exchange of experiences and agreed on the following steps for
further cooperation.



The Nordic DPAs will continue to contribute to the EDPBs valuable work on guaranteeing a
harmonised application of the GDPR.
We emphasize the value of a close cooperation within the EDPB and its expert subgroups and
commit to contribute to this to the best of our efforts. The network of our DPAs international
coordinators will be further strengthened in order to make best use of resources and to
provide an arena for exchanging information on a regular basis.



As agreed in the Copenhagen declaration all DPAs have carried out a DPO audit, the result of
which will be finalized and concluded in connection to our next meeting.
We highlight the importance of carrying out joint investigations and acknowledge the need
to continue to work together and sharing national experiences both regarding methodology
and outcomes.
We will arrange a Nordic DPA workshop, going deeper into the different issues.



We recognize the importance of controllers and processors being accountable and agreed to
help ensure GDPR compliance inter alia by supporting DPOs in their important tasks.

Our cooperation will as always be based on the Nordic values and traditions when it comes to
respecting the individuals’ fundamental rights and freedoms, transparency and the rule of law.

The Nordic Data Protection Authorities

Lena Lindgren Schelin
Director General, Swedish Data Protection
Authority

Cristina Angela Gulisano
Director, Danish Data Protection Agency

Reijo Aarnio
Data Protection Ombudsman, Finland

Björn Erik Thon
Data Protection Commissioner, Norway

Helga Thorisdottir
Data Protection Commissioner, Iceland

Eydhild Skaalum,
Director, the Faeroe Islands

Joakim Söderberg
Head of Authority, Åland

