Change your password day" on February 1st

Also this year, the Bavarian State Commissioner for the
Privacy the importance of choosing secure passwords and gives
Tips on this

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 31.01.2019
February 1st is again the "change your password day".
For many years already "stolen" credentials for accounts have been published or sold. In many cases that will
facilitated by not sufficiently secure passwords. That shows also the
most recently published data about politicians and journalists. Nevertheless, as in the previous year, the number sequence "123456"
the list of the most popular German passwords published by the HassoPlattner Institute every year.
Petri: "Concretely imagine what it would mean for you personally if your data falls into the wrong hands because of insecure, easy-to-crack passwords. In the episode can also
sensitive data, such as bank details
or private chat content. Well chosen passwords are a building block, with
which you can help to protect your data. I therefore encourage you to use the "Change Your Password Tag" to access your credentials
make it safer. Protecting your privacy is worth a little
Time to invest. "
What you should pay particular attention to when choosing passwords:
•

Use passwords with at least eight characters. Use
You also upper and lower case letters, numbers and special characters.

Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 31.01.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

•

Avoid passwords that are directly related to you, such as
the name of family members or a pet.

•

Avoid passwords that consist of characters that appear on the
Keyboard next to each other (for example "123456" or
"Qwerty").

•

Avoid (pass) words in the Duden or in another
Dictionary are listed.

•

Do not use the same password for different services.

•

Change preset passwords.

•

Reduce the protective effect of your chosen password
not with a simple answer to a security question that the
Resetting the password allows. Do not use information that is easy to guess or otherwise research
are, such as names of family members.

Use the two-factor authentication for important accounts - if available. This means that usually in addition to the
Password a further independent factor is required to log in.
This can be a further authentication via an SMS
conveyed PIN or possession of an item such as a security token.
If you have additional accounts for resetting credentials
use, also protect them with strong passwords.
Delete accounts and all internet services data you
no longer need.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
