"Safer Internet Day" on February 5, 2019
Security and privacy on the internet is something we all care about.

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 05.02.2019
Also this year the "Safer Internet Day" will take place again. The day of action on 5 February 2019 is under the motto "Together for a better
Internet".
The current objective "Together for a better Internet" throws in
important point is that security on the Internet requires the cooperation of many different actors. The responsible service providers, legislators, regulators and Internet users, as well
the developers and providers of technical and software solutions must
Contribute to the Internet to a safe and privacy-friendly
Environment.
First and foremost, software developers and providers are required to comply with the principles of "Data protection through technology design" as well as
"Privacy by privacy-friendly preferences" in the
implement products offered by them.
In addition, Internet users can often already with manageable
Expense to achieve a high security gain. Important aspects
are the encrypted transmission and the secure storage of
Dates.
-

Only use secure and trusted Internet offers
for your personal information, the minimum encryption
(SSL) and certificates from trusted exhibitors.

-

Take advantage of the use of end-to-end encryption, there
where it is offered.
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 05.02.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

-

Take advantage of the possibilities for secure configuration of
Smartphones.

-

Check your browser settings and customize them to your needs.

Petri: "We all use the Internet - both professionally and privately -
that gives us tons of information and services always and
accessible everywhere. Everybody should join in every now and then
deal with the associated risks, because it is often
Achieve a considerable security gain with little effort. "
Tips on Internet security are available on many websites, for example at https://www.bsi-fuer-buerger.de (external link)
https://www.klicksafe.de (external link) or https://www.youngdata.de
(external link) and of course on the websites of the data protection supervisory authorities.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
