press release
711.408.1
September 19, 2019

Delivery Service and Online Bank -
Berliner Datenschutzbeauftragte imposes sensitive fines
In August 2019, the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
Fines totaling 195,407 euros including fees against the delivery hero
Germany GmbH. The decision is final.
With the fines the Berlin data protection officer punished various
individual data protection violations of the company. The majority of cases concerned the
Disregard of the data subjects, such as the right to information on the processing of the
own data, the right to delete the data and the right to object.
According to the findings of the Berlin Data Protection Commissioner, the Delivery Hero
Germany GmbH in ten cases accounts of former customers not deleted,
although those affected for years - in one case even since 2008 - no longer up
company's delivery service platform. Eight former customers
In addition, they complained about unwanted advertising emails from the company.
An injured party expressly using its data for promotional purposes
had received another 15 advertising e-mails from the delivery service. In
another five cases were granted by the company to the complainant
Persons the demanded self-information not or only after the citizens of Berlin
Data Protection Officer.
The data subject rights of the data protection basic regulation (DS-GVO) form an important one
Instrument for each individual in enforcing the fundamental right
Informational self-determination. The European legislator was at the
Adoption of the General Data Protection Regulation is an important concern
Strengthen the rights of the citizens. Every company that
processes personal data, it must therefore be technically and organizationally able to
corresponding requests of the persons concerned to be fulfilled immediately.
The Delivery Hero Germany GmbH had to the supervisory authority some of the violations
explained with technical errors or employee mistakes. Due to the high number of
However, repeated violations were of fundamental, structural
Organizational problems go out. Despite many indications of the supervisory authority were
For a long time, no adequate measures have been implemented, which
ensure the proper fulfillment of the rights of those concerned.
The fines were made in two decisions, as part of the infringements are still after
Became effective the DS-GVO valid data protection right was to judge. Decisive for

Responsible: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 900
Fax: 030 2155050

-2-

the question of whether an infringement is to be assessed according to old or new legal position is the
Time of the offense.
In deciding on the imposition of a fine and the amount of the fine, the
Berlin Data Protection Commissioner in each individual case discretionary criteria such as those in Art. 83 para.
2 DS-GVO mentioned. In particular, in the assessment the concrete flowed
Circumstances regarding the type, severity and duration of the respective infringement. Furthermore, the
Consequences of the respective infringement and the measures taken by those responsible
taken into account in order to avert or mitigate the consequences of the infringement.
As of April 1, 2019, the Delivery Hero brands Lieferheld, Pizza.de and foodora of the
Dutch concern Takeway.com taken over. The procedure
underlying violations were all committed prior to this acquisition. The new
Owner has accepted the fines and has not appealed. Opposite the
Supervisor said takeaway, greatest value to the observance of data protection law
to lay. The process was taken as an opportunity, the processes again
thoroughly check.
Already in March 2019, the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
a first considerable fine according to the standards of the DS-GVO in the amount of 50,000 euros
set against the online bank N26. The young company had for purposes of
Prevention of money laundering the names of former customers on a black
Regardless of whether they were actually suspected of money laundering.
Also N26 has accepted the fine and to the Berlin data protection officer
A series of measures announced to address previous organizational shortcomings
eliminate and thereby protect the privacy of their customers.
In particular, the company undertook to comprehensively engage its data protection staff
increase and train.
Overall, the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information has since the new
Law 27 fines under the DS-GVO and two fines after dem new Berliner
Data Protection Act issued.
Maja Smoltczyk
"The issue of privacy has long been neglected in many companies,
although it is a particularly important fundamental right in the digital age. The DS-GVO works
against that. The willingness to recondition of
Defects meanwhile recognizable. I hope that these fines also affect others
Companies have a warning effect. Who works with personal data,
needs a functioning data protection management. This not only helps fines too
but also strengthens the trust and satisfaction of the clientele. Berliner
Companies that are still in the start-up phase, I recommend our twice
monthly start-up consultation to seek data protection
Questions to clarify early. "
