GZ: DSB-D123.085 / 0003-DSB / 2018 dated 27.8.2018 [Note: Users and names, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] DECISION The DPA decides on the data protection complaint of Richard A *** (complainant) dated 26 June 2018 against N *** Personaldienstleistungen GmbH (Respondent) for infringement of the right to Deletion as follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: Art. 17 (3) lit e, Art. 57 para. 1 lit. f and Article 77 (1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR), OJ No. L 119 p. 1; § 24 of the Data Protection Act - DSG, BGBl. I Nr. 165/1999 as amended; Sections 17 (1) (1), 26 (1) and 29 (1) of the Federal Act on Equal Treatment (Gleichbehandlungsgesetz - GlBG), Federal Law Gazette I No. 66/2004 as amended. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. By submission of 26 June 2018, the complainant alleged an infringement of the right to erasure and submitted that by e-mail on 31 May 2018 he had deleted his personal data from the applicants' database Respondent has requested. However, by letter dated 19 June 2018, the Respondent stated that it would not comply with this request for cancellation. Although the respondent's candidacy will no longer be considered for the respondent's vacancies, there is a statutory retention obligation under the Equal Treatment Act of six months plus one month for the potential action. The entry is accompanied by the correspondence between the complainant and the respondent preceding the complaint procedure before the data protection authority. 2. By reply dated 16 July 2018, the Respondent summarized that the complainant had applied for the candidate database "hr - ***" on 17 May 2018 and 11 June 2018. The reason for the - until further notice - permissible storage of the data would be the Equal Treatment Act. It was necessary to keep the application documents at least for a period of six months, so that the Respondent could, in case of any claim, be free to do so by reference to the data provided in the application. 3. The complainant, in the framework of the party hearing granted to him, by letter of the Data Protection Authority of 20 July 2018 no longer issued an opinion. B. Object of the complaint The appellant submits that the subject of the complaint is whether the respondent infringed the right of the applicant to deletion by failing to comply with the request for cancellation of 31 May 2018. C. Determination of facts 1. The complainant applied to the Respondent on 17 May 2018 and 11 June 2018, which is why the complainant's personal data was stored in the Respondent's applicant database. Assessment of evidence: The findings made are based on the Respondent's undisputed arguments of 16 July 2018. 2. The complainant requested on 31 August 2018 the deletion of his data from the Respondent's applicant database. By letter dated 19 June 2018, the Respondent stated that the application was not complied with, but that the applicant data were no longer used for vacancies. The Respondent further informed the complainant that the candidate data will be deleted six months plus one month for the potential action, in total seven months after the application has been submitted. The complainant was also informed that the candidate data due to a potential procedure under the Equal Treatment Act - at least for the time being - still need to be saved. Assessment of evidence: The findings are based on the complainant's submission of 26 June 2018 and the correspondence between the complainant and the respondent preceding the complaint proceedings before the data protection authority, which is attached to the petition. D. From a legal point of view it follows: D.1 Applicable legislation Art. 17 GDPR including title: Article 17 Right to cancellation ("Right to be forgotten") (1) The data subject has the right to demand that the person responsible: personal data relating to him / her shall be deleted immediately and the controller shall be obliged to erase personal data without undue delay, if any of the following shall be true: (a) the personal data are no longer used for the purposes for which they were collected or otherwise processed necessary. (b) the data subject withdraws the consent on which the processing referred to in Article 6 (1) (a) or Article 9 (2) (a) was based and lacks any other legal basis for the processing. (c) The data subject objects to the processing in accordance with Article 21 (1) and there are no high-level legitimate grounds for the processing or the data subject objects to the processing in accordance with Article 21 (2). d) The personal data were processed unlawfully. e) The deletion of personal data is required to fulfill a legal obligation under Union or national law to which the controller is subject. (f) the personal data have been collected in relation to information society services offered in accordance with Article 8 (1). (2) If the controller has made public the personal data and is obliged to delete them in accordance with paragraph 1, he shall take appropriate measures, including technical ones, to data controllers processing the personal data, taking into account available technology and implementation costs to inform that an affected person has requested that they delete all links to such personal data or copies or replications of such personal data. 3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the extent necessary for the processing: (a) to exercise the right to freedom of expression and information; (b) to fulfill a legal obligation required by the law of the Union or of the Member States to which the controller is subject, or to perform a task which is in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority delegated to the controller ; (c) for reasons of public interest in the field of public health as referred to in Article 9 (2) (h) and (i) and Article 9 (3); (d) for archival purposes of public interest, for scientific or historical research purposes or for statistical purposes, in accordance with Article 89 (1), where the right referred to in paragraph 1 is likely to render impossible or seriously affect the achievement of the objectives of that processing, or (e) to be asserted, exercised or defense of legal claims. § 17 Abs. 1 Z 1 GlBG reads including heading: Equal treatment requirement in connection with an employment relationship § 17. (1) Due to the ethnicity, religion or belief, age or sexual orientation in connection with an employment relationship no one may directly or indirectly, not in particular 1. in the creation of the employment relationship, § 26 Abs. 1 GlBG is inclusive title: Legal consequences of violation of the rule of equal treatment § 26. (1) If the employment relationship for breach of the equal treatment requirement of § 17 para 1 Z 1), the employer is obliged to compensate the job applicant for the financial loss and compensation for the personal injury suffered. [...] Paragraph 29 (1) of the GlBG including heading: Time limits for asserting claims § 29. (1) Claims under § 26 (1) and (5) must be asserted in court within six months. The period for asserting the claims under § 26 (1) and (5) begins with the rejection of the application or promotion. Claims under § 26 (11) must be brought to court within one year. For claims under § 26 (2), (3), (4), (6), (8), (9) and (10), the three-year limitation period applies in accordance with § 1486 of the General Civil Code. D. 2 Exceptions to the right to cancellation The right to cancellation according to Art. 17 (1) and (2) GDPR is not considered if processing is required in the cases enumerated by Article 17 (3) (a) to (d) DSGVO , In the present case, the facts under Article 17 (3) (e) of the GDPR, that is to say a processing which might be necessary for the assertion, exercise or defense of legal claims, come into consideration. It should be noted that the "defense of legal claims" - not contradictory to the wording - means "defense against legal claims". In any event, this regulation will apply in the event that the assertion, exercise or defense of (or against) legal claims already takes place or is imminent. The mere abstract possibility of legal disputes is not sufficient (see Herbst in Kühling / Buchner, DSGVO Comment [2017] Art. 17 para. 83). The Constitutional Court has also stated in connection with a deletion request against a public sector officer that the mere general indication that there are still "pending cases" is not sufficient. On the contrary, it must be stated in detail on a case-by-case basis, when a procedure has been concluded, that there is a "necessity to keep the documents concerning the private life" of the person concerned. In addition, it must be stated which specific proceedings are still pending in connection with the documents of the procedure already completed (see also the findings of the Constitutional Court of 12 December 2017, E 3249 / 2016-11, see also the decision of the DPA of April 25, 2018, DSB-D122,776 / 0007-DSB / 2018). Relating to a deletion request against a person in charge of the private sector (as in the present case), these statements mean that the general reference to potentially future, pending or not imminent (court) proceedings is not sufficient in order to avoid the cancellation request , On the contrary, the person responsible must explain which specific future procedures could be made on which basis and to what extent such procedures, at the time of the decision of the DPA, justify a need for further storage of personal data. D. 3 On the merits In the present case, the respondents refused - at least for now - the immediate deletion of the complainant's candidate data and brought a possible assertion of a claim for compensation according to § 26 (1) GlBG into the meeting. The Respondent's performance is not to be countered in the result: According to § 29 (1) GlBG, a claim for compensation pursuant to § 26 (1) GlBG can be asserted within a period of six months. Thus, the Respondent does not generally refer to a potentially future procedure, but designates a specific claim that could be asserted against it within a specific time frame. Candidate data can of course serve as a basis for deciding whether to establish an employment relationship with a particular applicant. Against this background, in accordance with Art. 17 (3) (e) DSGVO, the further storage of applicant data is necessary in order to defend oneself against a claim under Section 26 (1) GlBG or to be justified in proceedings under the GlBG There would be no discrimination within the meaning of Section 17 (1) (1) GlBG. The Respondent also specified a specific date from when it would delete the applicant data. For the complainant, it is therefore clear from what point in time his application data will be deleted. In addition, the Respondent also agreed to delete the complainant's applicant data at the earliest possible date, ie after expiry of the period of § 29 para. 1 GlBG (objectively seven months after the application, thus calculated from 17 May 2018 or 11 June 2018). The additionally calculated month at the six-month time limit pursuant to § 29 (1) GlBG in order to set off a potential claim, ie seven months after the application is received, is appropriate and not disproportionately long. The Respondent also agreed to keep the present Applicant Data for defense against a claim for compensation under the GlBG and no longer use it to fill any vacancies. D. 4 Result In the present case, the six-month period of § 29 para. 1 GlBG (or seven months after receipt of the application) at the time of the decision of the DPA has not yet expired. Against this background, the conditions of Art. 17 (3) (e) GDPR are in place, which means that the claim for cancellation must be rejected in the result. Therefore was to decide according to the award. Moreover, the complainant with the right of access pursuant to Art. 15 GDPR also has at his disposal an instrument to check whether the Respondent continues to store the complainant's personal data (specifically, applicant data) after the deadline has expired.
