TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Conimissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

EE Limited

Trident Place, Mosquito Way, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, ALLO 9BW

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
EE Limited with a monetary penalty under section 55A of the Data
Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in relation to a serious
contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”) by EE
Limited.

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

EE Limited, whose registered office is given above (Companies House
registration number: 02382161), is the person stated in this notice to
have instigated the transmission of unsolicited communications by

means of electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of

direct marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.

Regulation 22 of PECR states:
oS

1cO.

Information Commissioner's Office
“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited

communications by means of electronic mail to _ individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
i)
1C O oS
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) PECR as “any text, voice,
sound or image message sent over a public electronic communications
network which can be stored in the network or in the recipient’s
terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and includes

messages sent using a short message service”.

The term “soft opt-in” is used to describe the rule set out in in
Regulation 22(3) of PECR. In essence, an organisation may be able to
e-mail its existing customers even if they haven’t specifically consented
to electronic mail. The soft opt-in rule can only be relied upon by the

organisation that collected the contact details.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) (Amendment)

Regulations 2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements
of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.

(3) This subsection applies if the person -
10.

11.

12.

13,

Information Commissioner's Office

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

EE Limited is one of the UK’s largest digital communications

companies.

On 12 March 2018 EE Limited sent a direct marketing text message to

an individual as follows:
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

oO
] C O a)
Information Commissioner's Office
“My EE: Get Active! Not long now, X! You'll soon be able to switch up
your routine by upgrading your Apple Iphone 6s. You can countdown
the days to your upgrade with the My EE app. Just like the My EE
website, it lets you view your bill, check your refresh data and usage.

Stay active on the go and log in http://discover.ee.co.uk/A6r4j3n7
today.”

Following receipt of the message the individual made a complaint to
the Commissioner explaining that they had previously opted out of
marketing messages from EE Limited. The Commissioner wrote to EE
Limited on 19 March 2018, providing details of the complaint made. EE
Limited were warned that the Commissioner could issue civil monetary
penalties of up to £500,000 for PECR breaches.

EE Limited were informed that it was the Commissioner’s view that
organisations cannot send marketing messages to an individual to
promote a product or service if that individual has opted out of
receiving such direct marketing messages. To include a marketing

message within a service message is also prohibited.

EE Limited advised that it had sent 16,620,416 “Get Active” messages
to its customers between 17 February 2018 and 25 March 2018.
However, EE Limited indicated that whilst this number of direct
marketing messages was attempted only 14,544,582 were successfully

received.

EE Limited explained that they felt this constituted a service message
and was therefore outside of the remit of the rules regarding direct

marketing.

The “Get Active” messages had been sent in two batches. The second

batch were sent to customers who did not interact with, use or
19;

20.

21.

Lids

23.

@
1c O.
Information Commissioner's Office
download the My EE application following the initial message. A revised

version of the initial message were sent in the second batch as

follows:

“Mr EE: Get Active! Want to flex your data muscles this month, first
name. ? Use the My EE app to see how much data you have left, check
when your refresh date is, manage your bill and much more. Get active
on My EE and log in <URL> today.”

Between 17 February 2018 and 1 March 2018, a total number of
8,183,881 messages were sent. Of that number, 1,515,990 individuals
had previously opted out of receiving marketing messages via text

message.

Between 14 March 2018 and 25 March 2018 a second batch of
messages were sent totalling 8,436,535. Of that number, 1,210,440
individuals had previously opted out of receiving marketing messages

via text message.

Of the total 2,726,430 messages sent to individuals who had previously
opted out of receiving direct marketing, 2,590,456 were successfully
received. Of these messages, 775,015 individuals received a message

in each batch.

EE Limited was consequently unable to evidence that the individuals to
whom direct marketing messages had been sent had consented to

receipt of the messages.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.
24.

256

26.

2/7.

28.

Z9,,

30.

oO
1C O UO
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute

a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by EE Limited and, if so,
whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that EE Limited has contravened regulation 22
of PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 17 February 2018 and 25 March 2018, EE Limited instigated
the transmission of 2,590,456 unsolicited communications by means of
electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of direct

marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.

As the instigator of these messages, it was the responsibility of EE

Limited to ensure that sufficient consent had been acquired.

“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents

to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.

In this case the Commissioner is satisfied that EE Limited did not have
the consent, within the meaning of regulation 22(2), of the 2,590,456
subscribers to whom it had instigated the sending of unsolicited direct

marketing messages.

The Commissioner is satisfied that EE Limited was responsible for this

contravention.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified
above was serious. This is because between 17 February 2018 and 25
March 2018 EE Limited sent a total of 2,590,456 direct marketing

messages to subscribers without their consent.

EE Limited were aware that the messages were being sent to
individuals who, according to their records, had previously indicated

that they did not consent to receive direct marketing.

In addition, EE Limited also instigated the sending of a further 135,974
marketing messages. Although these were not received by individuals,
it evidences an attempt to send large volumes of marketing messages

to individuals without consent to do so.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified
above was deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this means that EE
Limited’s actions which constituted that contravention were deliberate
actions (even if EE Limited did not actually intend thereby to
contravene PECR). It is not necessary for EE Limited to have Known

that they were breaking the law for the contravention to be considered
37.

38.

35:

40.

41.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

deliberate.

The Commissioner considers that in this case EE Limited did

deliberately contravene regulation 22 of PECR.

EE Limited were aware that the messages were being sent to
individuals who, according to their records, had previously indicated
that they did not consent to receive direct marketing. Individuals have
a right to opt out of receiving direct marketing and as soon as they

have clearly said they wish not to receive it organisations must stop.

EE Limited had sufficient knowledge of the requirements under the DPA
and PECR and were aware of the Commissioner’s direct marketing
guidance. Whilst it was aware of these requirements, this did not
prevent EE Limited from messaging customers who had explicitly opted

out of receiving direct marketing.

Furthermore, the Commissioner has published detailed guidance for
those carrying out direct marketing explaining their legal obligations
under PECR. This guidance explains the circumstances under which
organisations are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text,
by e-mail, by post, or by fax. In particular it states that organisations
can generally only send marketing messages to individuals if that
person has specifically consented to receiving them from the sender.
Individuals have a right to opt out of receiving marketing at any time.
As soon as an individual says they don’t want the texts or emails, this
will override any existing consent or soft opt-in under PECR and they

must stop.

The Commissioner's direct marketing guidance is clear that if a
message includes any significant promotional material aimed at

customers to buy extra products or services or to renew contracts that
42.

43.

44.

9
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
are coming to an end that message is no longer a service message. It
instead crosses the threshold into marketing and will be subject to the
Same rules as other electronic marketing messages. The guidance also
stresses that organisations should keep clear records of what an
individual has consented to, and when and how this consent was

obtained, so that they can demonstrate compliance in the event of a

complaint.

The messages sent as part of the campaign were additionally designed
to promote and encourage customers to access and use the My EE app.
This in itself is promotional material. Whilst the app does offer a
customer the option to perform service related tasks such as checking
their monthly bills, it also offers customers the option to purchase new
products, add data to their account and ‘countdown the days’ until their
upgrade. The fact that EE Limited sent a second message to those who
did not engage with the app, following receipt of the first message,
further supports the Commissioner’s finding that these were marketing

messages.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that EE Limited
failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions in this

Case.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to impose a monetary penalty

45.

For the reasons explained above the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A(1)DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that section 55A(3)DPA and the procedural rights under

section 55B have been complied with.

10
46.

47.

48.

49.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent dated 18 April

2019 in which the Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances she
Should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty. In
reaching her final view, the Commissioner has taken into account
representations made by EE Limited dated 14 May 2019 however there
is nothing contained therein to dissuade the Commissioner from her
preliminary view. In particular, the Commissioner has considered EE
Limited’s representations that the text messages were service
messages and not direct marketing. However, the Commissioner is
satisfied that the messages include significant promotional material

and were therefore sent for the purposes of direct marketing.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of
unsolicited marketing text messages is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. The issuing of a
monetary penalty will reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that
they only send marketing text messages to those who specifically

consent to receiving such messages.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.
90.

SLs

52.

D3

54.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that the amount of the penalty is £100,000 (One hundred thousand
pounds)

Conciusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 23 July 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
22 July 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £80,000 (Eighty thousand pounds). However, you should
be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you decide

to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
55.

56.

ore

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 20' day of June 2019

 

Andrew White

Director

Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

13
ANNEX 1

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1, Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
‘Tribunal’) against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a)

b)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

cr You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

a)

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8D)

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.
o

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it

unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule,

The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).