THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

January 22, 2019

Clean up after the political hack
The Internet does not forget anything? But.

The political hack, in which a student apparently captured personal information from 994 politicians and celebrities and tens of thousands of citizens and distributed on the Internet for retrieval, is by no means over. Although the culprit seems determined
and confessed - but the sometimes very personal data were spread in the network, that it seems almost hopeless to collect them there again and
This will prevent journalists, political opponents, intelligence agencies or
also private interested parties find them there and download - out of curiosity and
Schadenfreude, with damage intention, from professional interest, for purposes
later extortion or manipulation ...
"The Internet does not forget anything!" Is not without reason, because if like this
spectacular case the information bag cleverly distributed across platforms worldwide
are the victims are almost powerless, if they want to limit the personal damage and prevent their data "forever" on the net.
This is particularly related to the fact that the possibilities of anonymous use of international platforms are almost unlimited - and many such providers
just boasting of being bullet proof and being regulated by state
Effective removal of authorities such as supervisory and security authorities and courts,
to the detriment of the victims of the hacks injured in their rights.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

But we are completely powerless against the unregulated vastness of the Internet:
The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI)
was able to achieve its first "takedown successes" - also on non-European platforms. Around 1000 download addresses have been deleted in the meantime, with several
Another hundred LfDI are in contact with the other European supervisory authorities. After all, the platform operators also have to bear their share of responsibility and delete unlawful content after having taken note of it.
Data security obviously does need. Only those who are very careful on the protection of his
Pay attention to personal data by avoiding dubious providers on the net, choosing their passwords well and differentiated, who in his own "information policy" Private
and Public wise makes a difference, which can reduce the risk, even victims of one
But you can never totally rule it out, if only because
Third parties (relatives, acquaintances, colleagues, authorities, etc.) work with our data and their negligence and errors in terms of data security meet us.
How to behave, if you have become a victim of a hacker attack, about it clarifies the LfDI soon in a guideline "Hacked - what to do?" On.
For those who, for professional or personal reasons, searched the internet for data from this or other leaks and perhaps even downloaded this data from corresponding platforms, the danger of getting involved in the
Is to deal with the copied data even with viruses or Trojans, is
extremely high. Because on the dubious platforms, which hackers usually for
use the distribution of their prey, it is teeming with malicious software, the
Consider the Hackerbeute being downloaded right away. For this the note:
Virus protection programs, whether free from the net or paying dearly, are always
a step behind the attackers. Your help against newly developed damaged goods
Protection program only tomorrow.
That's why journalists and editors should get away with it as soon as possible
convince, which uninvited visitors have left them in their network and
how to get rid of them The LfDI also advises on this.

-3-

Doxing - No thanks!
Dismissing and disclosing personal data to other people on the Internet through criminal procedures (so-called doxing) is not only punishable but also violated
our privacy, which we all depend on to lead a trusting, healthy and self-determined life. In the political space - like
In the case of political hacking, such leaked information also contaminates the social discourse, rendering controversial or blackmailable public actors. With that, Doxing puts the ax to the roots of our liberal and open
Society.
Beyond the reactions of our security agencies, we must be citizens
and citizens also l
