annual report
the Berlin commissioner for data protection and
Freedom of information as of 31 December 2018

The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information has to submit an annual report to the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate on the outcome of their work (§§ 12 Berliner Datenschutzgesetz, § 18 Abs. 3 Berliner Informationsfreiheitsgesetz). This report closes on 23 March 2018
Annual Report 2017 and covers the period between 1 January
and December 31, 2018.
The annual report is also available on our website, see: https: //
www.datenschutz-berlin.de

imprint
Publisher: Berlin Commissioner for
Privacy and Freedom of Information
Friedrichstr. 219, 10969 Berlin
Phone: (0 30) + 138 89-0
Fax: (0 30) 2 15 50 50
E-Mail: mailbox@datenschutz-berlin.de
Internet: https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/
Layout:

april agency GbR

Sentence:

LayoutManufaktur.com

Pressure:

ARNOLD group

content

content
List of abbreviations. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 9
Introduction. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 13
1

focus
1.1 Processing of cross-border cases according to the DS-GVO. , , , , , , , 17
1.2 Processing complaints under the DS-GVO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 19
1.3 Duty to inform about data breaches. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 23
1.3.1 Obligations to the supervisory authority. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 25
1.3.2 Obligations towards the persons concerned. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 26
1.4 Privacy Certification - The Road to Privacy Seal. , , , , 28
1.4.1 Certification and accreditation. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 29
1.4.2 Procedure of the accreditation process. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 31
1.4.3 Monitoring the certification and development of the
Conditions . , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 33
1.5 Advertising according to the DS-GVO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 35
1.5.1 Definition. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 35
1.5.2 New regulations. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 36
1.5.3 Consent. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 38
1.5.4 Change of purpose. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 39
1.5.5 Law against Unfair Competition and DS-GVO. , , , , , , 40
1.5.6 Observe advertising conflict. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 40
1.6 The new Berlin Data Protection Act - Hopefully not the
last stand. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 41
1.7 Facebook fan pages and shared responsibility
for data processing. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 44
1.7.1 Hearing proceedings in Berlin. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 44
1.7.2 Interpretation and scope of joint processing
personal data. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 46
1.8 Berlin Land laws - Fit for Europe? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 48

3

content

2

Digital administration
2.1 Digitization projects in Berlin. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 50
2.2 Aid online. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 52

3

Interior
3.1 threatening letters to the left scene with data from police databases. , , , 55
3.2 Processing of personal information in police
Databases. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 57
3.3 Vulnerability in POLIKS police database? , , , , , , , , , 58
3.4 Control of the accreditation process at the G20 summit. , , , , , , , , 60
3.5 He
5000/5000
Character limit: 5000
sthelfer app "Katretter" of the Berlin fire department. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 62
3.6 Locating emergency calls to the Berlin fire department. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 64
3.7 Video surveillance after the effective date of the DS-GVO. , , , , , , , , , , , 66
3.8 video cameras at the Alexwache. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 68

4

Transport and tourism
4.1 fahrCard - With photograph and full name? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 71
4.2 Driving School: Data transfer to an interest association. , , , , , , , , 72
4.3 Obligation to order data protection officers
Taxi company. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 73
4.4 Intelligent video surveillance in the Berlin-Südkreuz station. , , , , , , 75
4.5 Connected and Automated Driving - What are the privacy risks of the new techniques? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 77

5

Youth and education
5.1 Adaptation of the Berlin Education Act to the DS-GVO -
All's well that ends well? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 83
5.2 Implementation of the DS-GVO in child and youth welfare. , , , , , , , , , , , 85
5.3 Uniform Special Procedures in the Berlin Youth Welfare -
Progress report. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 87
5.4 Privacy in Kitas - How well will the data of our
Youngest protected? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 88
5.5 Data protection and media literacy - K
inderwebsite
www.data-kids.de online. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 90

4

content

5.6 Elterngeld Digital - An innovative project? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 91
5.7 Please smile! Video and audio recordings in the classroom too
Research purposes. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 92
6

Health and care
6.1 Judgment on the quality assurance procedure of the panel physicians
Association Berlin. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 95
6.2 Prostitute protection law - Data protection compliant implementation
in the state of Berlin? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 96
6.3 Problematic introduction of an electronic health record. , 98
6.4 Baby Plus Plus: Extension to all Berlin maternity hospitals. , , , , 100
6.5 Charité: New Law - Old Problems. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 101
6.6 Online service providers: handling of personal data
in the medical sector. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .103
6.7 A Nursing on Cloud International. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 104
6.8 Clinical Cancer Registry: Extended Storage of
Registration forms. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 105
6.9 individual cases. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 106
6.9.1 Medical certificate for admission to day nurseries. , , , , , , , , , , , 106
6.9.2 Do physicians have access to patient data
Reveal rating portals? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 107

7

Social and work
7.1 Social assistance data at the Senate Department for Integration,
Work and Social - Legal and Secure? , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 108
7.2 Medical information to the State Office for Health and Human Services
Social. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 110
7.3 Inadmissible exchange of social data between the district office
and health insurance. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 111
7.4 Sensitive data of course participants on an internal
Online learning platform. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 112

8th

Employee Data Protection
8.1 The burden and blessings of voluntary work. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 114
8.2 Handling Migrationsdaten. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 115

5

content

8.3 Transfer of the medical bill of an employee to a third party. , , , 118
8.4 Inspection of Appraisals of Competitors
Competitors. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 119
9

economy
9.1 "Press ..." - recording of customer calls
the DS-GMO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 122
9.2 "Your ID card, please!" - Identification when asserting the data subject rights. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .123
9.3 Long storage period for delivery services. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 125
9.4 Report from the start-up consultation. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 126
9.5 Silent factoring in the age of the DS-GVO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 127
9.6 Transfer of account data to remittance recipient. , , , , , , , , 129
9.7 Illegal entry in the warning database of the
Insurance industry. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 130
9.8 Black list of an online bank. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 131
9.9 Data transmission with video identification. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 132

10 political parties and the House of Representatives of Berlin
10.1 Data from refugee workers on NPD website. , , , , , , , , , , , , , 133
10.2 Election campaign with the help of Deutsche Post. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 134
10.3 Initiative "Neutral School" of the AFD Group. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 135
10.4 Transfer of personal data in written form
Requests . , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 137
11 From the work of the sanctioning body
11.1 Development of the administrative offenses procedure. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 139
11.2 Unauthorized data collection from the police database POLIKS. , , , 140
11.3 Police officer warns of police raids. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 141
11.4 Dental assistant publishes the school report of one
Intern on the Internet. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 141
11.5 A criminal complaint against a chairman of the committee
House of Representatives of Berlin. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 142

6

content

12 Telecommunications and Media
12.1 Report from the Berlin Group. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 144
12.2 ePrivacy Regulation: No agreement in the European Council !. , , , , , , 147
12.3 Position determination of the Germans D
data protection conference:
Telemedia Act and usage data processing in times
the DS-GMO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 149
12.4 Photos in danger? Art Copyright Act and DS-GVO. , , , , , , , , , , , , , 151
12.5 A scoring for judges. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 152
13 Freedom of information
13.1 Freedom of information in Germany. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 155
13.2 Freedom of information in Berlin. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 156
13.2.1 General developments. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 156
13.2.2 Individual cases. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 158
14 From the service
14.1 Developments. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 163
14.2 Cooperation with the Berlin House of Representatives. , , , , , , , , , 166
14.3 Cooperation with other bodies. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 167
14.4 Press work. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 169
14.5 Public Relations. , , 171
14.5.1 Events. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 171
14.5.2 Publications. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 172
14.5.3 Lectures. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 173
attachment
Speech by the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Information
Freedom on 13 September 2018 in the Berlin House of Representatives
to the Annual Report 2017. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 176
Glossary. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 179
Index. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 189

7

content

hint
The glossary (at the end of the booklet) provides a list of explanations of various technical terms. The color highlighting of words in the text (eg
Market place principle) indicates that these are printed in the glossary.

8th

List of abbreviations

List of abbreviations
OJ. EU

Official Journal of the European Union

ASOG

General Security and Ordnungsgesetz

BAO

Specialized Aid Online

BauGB

Building Code

BDSG (a.

Federal Data Protection Act (old version)

BEEG

Federal Parental Allowance and Parental Leave Act

BGB

Civil Code

BGH

Federal Court

BKA

Bundeskriminalamt

BKAG

Federal law

BlnBDI

Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information

BlnDSG (a. F.) Berlin Data Protection Act (old version)
BSI

Federal Office for Security in Information Technology

Federal Constitutional Court

Federal Constitutional Court

BVerwG

Supreme Administrative Court

BVG

Berlin public transport

DAkkS

German Accreditation Body

DB AG

Deutsche Bahn AG

Drs.

printed matter

DSFA

Privacy impact assessment

DSK

German Privacy Conference

DS-GMO

European General Data Protection Regulation

EDSA

European Data Protection Committee

EGBGB

Introductory Act to the Civil Code

EGovG Bln

Berlin e-government law

EU

European Union

ECJ

European Court of Justice

GG

basic law

GPS

Global Positioning System

GVBl.

Law and Ordinance Gazette for Berlin

MLA

Money Laundering Act

HIS

Information and information system of the insurance industry
9

List of abbreviations

IBAN International Bank Account Number (International Bank Account
Number)
IFG

Berlin Freedom of Information Act

IFK

Conference of Freedom of Information Representatives in Germany

IMI

Electronic information system of the European authorities

INPOL

Information system of the state police authorities in Germany

ISBJ

Integrated software Berliner Jugendhilfe

ISO

International Organization for Standardization

IT

information technology

IWGDPT International Working Group for Data Protection in Telecommunications (so-called Berlin-Group)
JB

annual report

JI Directive

European Data Protection Directive for Justice and Home Affairs

KJHG

Child and Youth Welfare Act

KTDat

Committee on Communications Technology and Privacy

KunstUrhG

Art Copyright Act

KV

Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians

KWG

Banking Act

LABO

State Agency for Civil and Regulatory Affairs

LAGeSo

State Office for Health and Social Affairs

LAGetSi State Office for Occupational Safety, Health and Safety
safety
LBG

Land Civil Law

LSG

Landessozialgericht

LVwA

Landesverwaltungsamt

MuSchG

Maternity Protection Act

OVG

Higher Administrative Court

OWiG

Administrative Violations

PartIntG

Law regulating participation and integration

POLICY Police Information System, Communication and Information System
Clerical
PSSG

Personnel structure Statistics Act

SGB

Social Code

SDM

Default privacy model

Criminal Code

criminal code

Code of Criminal Procedure

Criminal Procedure
10

List of abbreviations

TKG

telecommunications Act

TV-L

Collective agreement of the countries

UIG

Environmental Information Act

UWG

Law against unfair competition

VBB

Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg

VDV

Association of German Transport Companies

WP

Working Paper

ZDRL

Payment Services Directive

11

introduction

12

introduction

introduction
On May 25, 2018, it was called "And action, please!".
The General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO)
became effective. And in spite of all the doom calls
in a previously quite overheated public debate that fueled fears
and alleged pitfalls scandalized,
she runs amazingly smoothly. Of course there are teething troubles and uncertainties in and with the new EU-wide binding data protection law. This
but can at the complete re-creation of a legal area at European
Level - and that is exactly what it is - even without case law and knowledge of experience basically g
5000/5000
Character limit: 5000
ar not be different. Now, after almost one
Year has passed, everything clearly appears in a different light.
The DS-GVO has learned to walk against all prophecies. This shows
above all, the enormous amount of complaints that persists today,
the volume of requests for advice and the number of data breaches reported to my agency.1 Although we were prepared for considerable extra work, our expectations ultimately came to an end, especially in the first weeks after
Effectiveness of the DS-GVO, significantly exceeded. In order to deal with the flood of incoming calls, at least to some extent, we started at first
DS-GMO telephone hotline for those seeking advice through which the most pressing questions
could be answered directly. And to this day, coping with the significantly increased workload poses a challenge
my authority only thanks to the extraordinary commitment of my
Employees keeps up. A relaxation is not in sight.
It is unmistakable that the new rules strengthen privacy in the
Focus of those responsible and, above all, has sensitized the citizens enormously for the protection of data privacy. I evaluate this development as
Success, especially as times are on the cusp of digitizing our entire
1

See 1.2 and 1.3
13

introduction

Living environment by no means easy for privacy. Submitting to the hype of digitization is mainstream, and concerns or references to
Problems and incompatibilities are only too happy as a hindrance to this
dismantled modern development.
More and more algorithms are deciding which news to use
Read which partner or partner you meet or even which party you choose. And also in the public administration with the help of
of algorithms and so-called artificial intelligence
automated decisions are being made. All this has hitherto been extremely intransparent. But only who the data basis, the sequence of actions
and knowing the weighting of the decision criteria, can legality
to review decisions. That's why I think it's urgent
It is also necessary to make automated decisions comprehensible, controllable and understandable. I therefore very much welcome that much
by the members of the Conference of Freedom of Information Representatives in Germany at the suggestion of the Freedom of Information Commissioners of Berlin, Bremen and
Schleswig-Holstein has formulated requirements in a position paper
public authorities even more consistent than before to a transparent and
responsible use of algorithms and artificial intelligence.2
Digitization puts democracy and the rule of law at an extreme level
Test. An occasional critical pause is more important
because ever, in view of the high pressure to adapt in our highly accelerated everyday life but also extremely difficult. The more important it is, already
Educate elementary school children about how to handle their own data, how to influence them, what to do with them
their most important condition is to remain critical and objective towards all information and messages on the net and
to acquire a basic knowledge of Internet mechanisms. My authority
Therefore, not only the mediation of media literacy, but also
written by the media. It is our goal that more
2
3

See 13.1
See 5.5
14

introduction

and more children not only serve digital media competently, but
also use reflected. Incidentally, this also includes not using them - for example, search engines that search queries
do not delete and create usage profiles. On our children's website, we offer a variety of educational materials for primary school children, parents
and also teachers. And also with the help of the
Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family published in November 2018 new edition of the booklet "I am looking for you. Who are you? "4 we hope
to be able to help make children smart and self-confident
Discover the online world.
It turns out: Design is the key! Privacy is not a brake for the
Progress, it is the necessary corrective to advance technical developments in line with our fundamental rights. A development
only serves the people if their rights are not easily put to the disposition. Also the new European General Data Protection Regulation
is to be understood exactly like that. It was not by the European institutions
designed to formalize people's lives and limit their opportunities for development. It is exactly the other way aroundreturns: The General Data Protection Regulation is the European answer to an increasingly rapid and globally evolving digitization of all areas of life. It offers the citizens
Citizens for the first time Europe-wide enforceable instruments to their rights
to enforce also against globally operating companies. of course is
that is not easy and much has to be specified in detail. But
it is an extremely important step and in my firm belief the only one
Promising way. My agency and I will continue to do so
Actively intervene in finding solutions to preserve and safeguard our democratic and free rights in the future.
Berlin, March 28, 2019
Maja Smoltczyk
Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
4 Available at https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/medienkompetenz/2018-BlnBDI-Broschuere_Soziale_Netzwerkde.pdf
15

Chapter 1

focus

16

1.1 Processing of cross-border cases according to the DS-GVO

1

focus

1.1

Processing of cross-border cases
according to the DS-GVO

Through the General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO), the work of our
Authority changed fundamentally. This applies in particular to the processing of
Complaints that are brought to us.1
What is new is that we not only handle complaints against Berlin companies and authorities. According to the General Data Protection Regulation, each affected
Person the right in particular to complain to a supervisory authority in the Member State of the European Union (EU) where it
Whereabouts or place of work, or where the alleged infringement occurred, if it considers that
personal data in violation of the GDPR.2 It comes
It is no longer necessary for the processor to be responsible for the area of ​​responsibility
Supervisory Authority is established. Rather, an affected person should
in principle, to any data protection supervisory authority in Europe.
All incoming complaints - but also all cases, which we ex officio
Therefore, we first check whether they have a so-called border
cross-border data processing3. This may be the case if the
or the person responsible is established in more than one EU Member State
and processing takes place in several of these branches. Even if
the responsible person has only one branch in the EU, one can
cross-border processing if the processing is significant
Impact on data subjects in more than one Member State or
may have. So it's enough if, for example, the service of a German
1
2
3

For general handling of complaints see 1.2.
Art. 77 para. 1 DS-GVO
Art. 4 no. 23 DS-GVO
17

Chapter 1

focus

Online retailer to citizens in Germany and Austria and possibly significantly interferes with their data protection rights.
Are there any indications of cross-border data processing?
All necessary information on the case will be included in an electronic information system of all European Supervisory Authorities (IMI). Check these
whether they are the lead or concerned supervisory authority in this case, and
sign up accordingly. We can also reach us via this path
which we are the lead or an affected regulator. To this
are a constant observation of the information system and a
systematic examination of cases reported there.
The lead regulatory authority will take over the further investigations in
the particular case. The supervisory authority at which the complaint originally
is in any case an affected supervisory authority. she has the
The complainant regularly on the status of the
Teaching to teach.4 This is also the purpose of the electronic exchange of information between the supervisory authorities. Necessary translations will be
provided by the supervisory authorities, so that there are no disadvantages for those affected.
Upon completion of the investigation, the lead regulatory authority will draft
a final decision in the complaint and informs all the supervisory authorities involved. These have four weeks to design
examine.5 Within this period they may object to the draft.
If no objection is raised, the lead regulatory authority issues the decision to the person responsible. He / she takes the necessary measures to ensure that it is processed in all branches in the EU
to be reconciled with the decision of the supervisory authority.6 The supervisory authority in which the complaint has been received notifies Bappellant or the complainant about the outcome of the proceedings.

4
5
6

Art. 77 para. 2, Art. 57 para. 1 lit. f DS-GMO
Art. 60 para. 4 DS-GVO
Art. 60 (10) DS-GVO
18

1.2 Processing complaints under the DS-GVO

If an affected supervisory authority objects to the draft, it must
justify this. If no agreement is reached, the lead supervisory authority shall initiate a dispute settlement procedure before the European Data Protection Board.7 This procedure is designed to ensure the uniform application of
DS-GMO throughout the EU. The European Data Protection Board
then takes a binding decision on the matter.8
The decision covers all aspects that were the subject of the opposition, in particular the question of whether there is a violation of the GDPR. The lead
The supervisory authority shall then, on the basis of the decision, without delay, but no later than one month after the communication thereof, make the decision to the person responsible.9 The supervisory authority, at which
the complaint has been filed, the complainant must accordingly
or inform the complainant.
We too, as the lead regulatory authority, have already drafted for
Decisions are coordinated with the relevant supervisory authorities in the described procedure. No objections have been raised against the drafts
so that the work could be done at work level. As a result, we have our decisions vis-à-vis those operating across borders
Responsible person residing in Berlin. The complainants were over
informed the result of their input.

1.2

Processing complaints after the
DS-GMO

The handling of complaints about data breaches of public
or private bodies already counted before the application of the DS-GVO to the legal tasks of the supervisory authorities. Even under European law, it is one of their duties to deal with complaints from affected

7
8th
9

Art. 60 para. 4 DS-GVO
Art. 65 para. 1 lit. a DS-GMO
Art. 65 para. 6 DS-GVO
19

Chapter 1

focus

Persons to investigate the subject matter of the complaint and the
to inform the person concerned of the outcome of this investigation.10
Due to the increased use of the DS-GVO increased attention for the
Data protection also increased the number of submissions and complaints
at the Berlin commissioner for data protection and freedom of information around
fourfold. It can be assumed that the number of entries will stabilize at a comparably high level in the future, as there has been no significant decline in entries so far. This is especially because
that the competence of our authority has expanded considerably. Before that were
we only for the treatment of complaints against Berlin authorities and
Company in charge. The so-called market place principle expands the authority of our authority to all places, the citizens of Berlin commodities
provide services or monitor their behavior.11
Through the legal framework established at European level with the DS-BER
In the processing of complaints, not only the division of responsibilities of the supervisory authorities for data protection within Germany, but the whole of Europe has to be considered. The DS-BER seeks to make it easier for citizens to protect themselves without unnecessary obstacles
Data by allowing them to file complaints in their own language and with the on- It is
now the task of the supervisory authorities, the responsibilities among themselves
clarify and work together constructively. If it concerns a cross-border complaint (for example, because it affected persons in several
EU states or a company operates in several states), takes place
Processing in coordination with the supervisory authorities of the countries concerned.12
For citizens who are concerned about Berlin companies and authorities
However, our authority remains over the entire procedure
the contact person on site and informs regularly about the respective
Sachstand.13

10
11
12
13

Art. 57 para. 1 lit. f DS-GMO
Art. 3 para. 2 DS-GVO
See 1.1
Art. 78 para. 2 DS-GVO
20

1.2 Processing complaints under the DS-GVO

We receive complaints and submissions mainly by e-mail, often by mail
and partly by fax or personal call. Many citizens
Fortunately, citizens are also using this at www.datenschutz-berlin.de/
complaint.html provided complaint form for their input, giving us
facilitated the editing in most cases. Due to the high number of
Entries from the end of May this year have been delayed by our time
Usually received confirmation within two weeks
for some time.The initial backlog could not be proportional to the
Input volume of increased personnel key in the service center citizen
Entries through weekend work and the temporary secondment of employees
be removed from other areas for the time being. However, this resulted in that
Work in the affected other areas remained because there was no staff compensation. Given the significant increase in inputs is
a proper and timely processing of citizens' complaints with the
existing personnel funds are no longer affordable.
In terms of content, the complaints are closely related to the rights that the
persons concerned by the GDPR (as was previously the case to a similar extent by
Federal Data Protection Act a. F.), but are not limited
to this. Many Berliners are interested in private ones
Companies such as public agencies stored personal data on them and submit a request for self-assessment, 14 which, unfortunately, often does not, not completely
or incorrectly answered within the prescribed time limit. Often it will
at the same time requested the deletion of their own data; this too from the
DS-GVO guaranteed right15 is unfortunately often violated. Although some Internet companies provide a deletion option with regard to the customer account.
However, the stored data will be stored in some cases
and used. Many people also complain about the generally escalating
Collection of your data by offices, private companies, medical practices or other persons (such as your landlord or landlady). In many cases, these citizens have a right of objection to the processing of their own data, 16 in the enforcement of which we the person concerned

14
15
16

Art. 15 DS-GMO
Art. 16, 17 DS-GVO
Art. 21 DS-GVO
21

Chapter 1

focus

as well as the violation of data processing agencies against the
Obligation to inform data subjects about data processing taking place.17
The data-transferability right newly created for data subjects with the GDPR, according to which the responsible authorities take along their own data
18 or the right not to be subject to a specific decision solely on the basis of automated data processing, 19
So far only a very small part of the inputs make.
In many cases, there is not necessarily a bad will behind you
violation of privacy rights. Often we are informed by complaints notified violations shortly after our intervention.
In case of less serious or immediately eliminated misconduct by
As a rule, we leave the person responsible responsible for a warning and refrain from taking further action.20 In the case of more serious violations, we can
to take other measures such as fines.21
Last but not least, the incoming complaints also serve as a measuring instrument
for what bothers citizens especially often. At the same time, they are an indicator of which business units or districts
due to a large number of submissions just to observe a negative development and possibly - with the means given to us - is also to be stopped. We
encourage all Berliners to continue to help us through the
To support the reporting of data breaches in their fight against them.22

17
18
19
20
21
22

Art. 12, 13 DS-GVO
Art. 20 DS-BER
Art. 22 DS-GMO
Art. 58 para. 2 lit. b DS-GMO
See chapter 11
datenschutz-berlin.de/beschwerde.html.
22

1.3 Duty to inform about data breaches

1.3

Duty to inform about data breaches

The new law23 sees a clear extension of the information requirements in the
Compared to the previous legal situation24, it now applies equally to non-public and public authorities in the state of Berlin.25 Previously, in the non-public sphere, only certain categories of data such as health data were used
In the public sector, there was a mandatory reporting requirement for all types of data, in both areas
However, the obligation to register only existed in the case of imminent grave impairment of the rights of those affected.26 Now it is against the supervisory authority
both public and non-public, any breach of the
Protection of personal data notifiable. This privacy violation
is defined as "breach of security that, whether inadvertent or unlawful, results in the destruction, loss, alteration or unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, personal data;
which have been transmitted, stored or otherwise processed ".27 After
The new legal situation is therefore not just common in earlier usage
"Data leakage" by loss of confidentiality includes, but also theloss
Availability by destruction or loss of integrity through alteration of personal data. It is irrelevant whether they are sensitive data which are subject to special protection under Art. 9 DS-GVO.
The controller is only required to report to the supervisory authority if the breach of personal data protection is not expected to pose a risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals
führt.28

23
24
25
26
27
28

Art. 33, 34 DS-GVO
To § 42a Federal Data Protection Act (BDSG) a. F. see JB 2010, 12.2; to § 18a Berliner
Data Protection Act (BlnDSG) a. F. see JB 2011, 11.2.1
The corresponding regulations for the areas of police and justice are §§ 51, 52
BlnDSG in implementation of the so-called JI-Directive (EU) 2016/680; see JB 2017, 3.1
§ 42a BDSG a. F .; Section 18a (1) BlnDSG a. F.
Art. 4 No. 12 DS-GVO
See note no. 18 of the Conference of Independent Data Protection Authorities
of the Federation and the Länder, "Risk for the Rights and Freedoms of Natural Persons", available at www.datenschutz-berlin.de/infothek-und-service/veroeffent
cations / short papers /
23

Chapter 1

focus

This significant tightening of the legal situation was probably the main reason
for the massive increase in the reporting of data breaches with us. While in the
During the reporting period, there were 357 notifications29, of which 332 were notifications since May 25, 2018.30 The number of notifications has settled at this high level, a decline
is not recognizable. For us, it is clear that data protection has also become more in the focus of those responsible because of these extended reporting obligations
especially as sanctions 31 are provided for breaches of On the other hand, the information received by the message must not
used to protect the privacy violation underlying the notification
to sanction.32 Multiple similar offenses, in particular those that
structural deficiencies attributable to the person responsible,
but could cause us to a tax audit.
By way of example, the following messages are outlined, which have reached us: So shared
a youth welfare center the theft of a USB stick with biographical
Data from the inpatient adolescents assisted, a company doctor sent a report to the wrong addressee and two hotels could not exclude after a hacker attack on a booking platform that credit card data to unauthorized persons. Further numerous reports concerned the use
from open e-mail distribution lists, which not only personal, u. U. "talking" e-mail addresses33 were mutually announced, but at the same time
sensitive data such as the fact of union affiliation (this is what happened
at a trade union). Increasingly, we also received reports about externally installed malicious software such as crypto-trojans. Thus, the files lying in the technical systems are encrypted by unauthorized persons in order to be used for the
29
30
31

32

33

44 notifications in the non-public sector, 7 notifications in the public sector
295 reports in the non-public area, 37 reports in the public sector
(As of December 31, 2018)
According to Art. 83 para. 4 lit. a i. V. m. Art. 33 DS-GVO amounts to a fine of up to 10 million
Euro or, in the case of a business, up to 2% of its total worldwide annual turnover for the previous financial year, whichever is the greater
Amounts is higher.
See § 43 para. 4 BDSG. The provision is an expression of the constitutional law
Prohibition of compulsion to self-incrimination and "succession" of § 42a sentence 6
BDSG a. F.
E-mail addresses are referred to as "talking" if they are first and last names
contain.
24

1.3 Duty to inform about data breaches

Decryption money blackmail - with medical data in a doctor's office
for obvious reasons almost a GAU.34

1.3.1

Obligations to the supervisory authority

Legal basis for the reporting obligation of the person responsible to us as
Supervisory authority is Art. 33 DS-GVO. After that, the person in charge reports the breach of data protection immediately and within 72 hours, if possible
he became known. This deadline includes the weekends and holidays
later notification must include a justification for the delay. In the vast majority of cases, the notification was made to us in due time, in the case of late reports mostly with a comprehensible justification for the delay. In
However, in one case it was unacceptable: that was the appeal of a public
Place on vacation, illness, increased workload, unclear responsibilities and on several occasions deemed necessary internal consultation also in the
Sum is not sufficient to justify the two-month delay in the notification. We have called for organizational improvements that will ensure the smooth andensure timely reporting to the responsible body in the future.
It should be noted that those responsible are not required to provide all information
to provide at the same time. Rather, the information can be gradually provided without undue further delay.36
To facilitate the registration process, we have a form with completion help in the
Internet, which is now predominantly used by those responsible. A guideline of the European Data Protection Committee (EDSA) gives

34
35

36

Worst case
Article 3 (3) of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1182/71 of 3 June 1971
Defining the rules for deadlines, dates and deadlines, OJ No. L 124 of 8 June
1971, p. 1 f.
Art. 33 para. 4 DS-GVO
25

Chapter 1

focus

valuable information on the interpretation of the new regulations and, in addition, examples of reportable incidents.37

1.3.2 Obligations towards the persons concerned
According to Art. 34 DS-GVO, the person responsible must immediately inform the data subject of the breach of the protection of personal data,
if the data breach is likely to be at high risk for the affected
Person leads. While the notification to us as the supervisory authority in the case of
Data breach is therefore the rule, this is the notification of those affected rather not. In the first case, "only" becomes a risk, but in the second case
a high risk to the rights and freedoms of the person concerned.
For this, it depends on a risk prediction, especially the abstract
Abuse risk (based on the type of data involved) and the specific risk of abuse (based on the actual potential impact of the data breach). Such high risk can be when it comes to
the former "catalog data" 38 is not a priori by the responsible person
be excluded. Rather, it requires a (documented) justification,
why there is likely to be no high risk for those affected by these data. Not enough is z. For example, the frequent reason that it is the thief of a
High quality laptops just went to the resale device, the data
previously deleted with certainty. That one person in charge but this
can not influence is obvious; he can not do that high risk
exclude. Therefore, we recommend a precautionary notification of the affected parties, especially for sensitive data.

37
38

Form, completion assistance and guideline (WP 250 rev. 01) are available at www.datenschutz-berlin.de/wirtschaft-und-verwaltung/meldung-einer-datenpanne/.
These are the data categories in the former § 42a BDSG, ie sensitive data such. B.
Health data, data subject to professional secrecy, data pertaining to
or any suspected offenses or bankruptcy, as well as bank account and credit card information.
26

1.3 Duty to inform about data breaches

In all other cases, we also recommend the person in charge
the persons concerned - irrespective of any obligation to notify under Art.
34 DS-GMO - to inform about the incident. Our concern with this recommendation is that as quickly as possible to those affected as possible
Transparency is made - not only because the idea of ​​transparency is one of the
Pillars of the DS-GVO is. Our experience shows that people are affected by everything
Mostly disapprove of the violation of data protection, if the
Responsible for his mistake and they are on their own and above all in a timely manner
informed. The majority of those responsible followed our recommendation.
In certain cases, there is no obligation to pay despite the high level of risk
Notification of those affected.39 This is z. As is the case when the lost disk was sufficiently encrypted. If the notification involved a disproportionate effort, a public notice or similar action should be taken instead.
through which the affected persons are informed with comparable effectiveness. Of this
Possibility have several responsible persons on our notice use
made. So has an exhibitor at a car show, after by mail
Applications with account information have been lost by subscribers interested, on his website over several weeks provided appropriate information. A professor of a university has after the during the
Pause took theft of his laptop from the seminar room a notice
attached to the department, which also referred to the loss of certificate data. Even an ad in a newspaper can as
effective publicity notice.
As a result, most of the responsible persons behaved cooperatively after the announcement.

39

Art. 34 para. 3 DS-GVO
27

Chapter 1From practice

1.4

focus

Privacy Certification - The Road to
Privacy Seal

If businesses want to convince their customers and business partners that they take their privacy seriously, then data protection seals will open the way for them. These seals can be issued by private certification authorities. We participate in the process
Permit and supervise certification bodies for their activities.
When customers or business associates decide to engage in a business relationship with a company, they often feel the need to
a quick overview of the level of data protection of relevant products and
To provide services. Companies that are in compliance with law
or have invested in privacy-friendly operation of their data processing, they want to show this to the outside world. Privacy Certificates and
Seals meet both needs.
Even before the validity of the General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO) gave
there are such certificates. However, it often remained intransparent what significance they actually have and how thoroughly the issuers of the certificates certified them
Service or the certified product.
The DS-GVO creates transparency here: Certification bodies must be one
Provide accreditation process. The criteria they apply for certification require the approval of the supervisory authorities and, where appropriate, the European Data Protection Board and are publicly available. When a
Certification Body a data processing positively assessed and certified, then
she must notify the competent authority. If these do not regard the certification criteria as fulfilled, they can issue the certificates
prohibit or revoke issued certificates. The accreditation of a certification authority can also be revoked.
The bottom line is that it helps everyone to find out whether products, processes and services provided by companies have a sufficient level of data protection. Even companies that are contract processors
28

1.4 Privacy Certification - The Road to Privacy Seal

how cloud service providers or shredders want to hire, get through
the certificates provide the security for themselves and their customers to use DS-GMO compliant services, even if the processor outside the
EU is established. The proof of data protection compliant data processing is thereby facilitated.
Companies that are themselves processors or processors can go through
The certificates show that they offer data protection compliant services. This simplified proof of observance of data protection requirements can bring competitive advantages.

1.4.1

Certification and accreditation

A meaningful certificate is at the end of a comprehensive certification process.
The certificate states
• which item, d. H. which product, which process or which
Service (certification object) has been certified,
• where you can read about the characteristics of the certification object
must at least ensure
• the scope of the certificate
• when it was issued and how long it applies as well
• who has carried out the certification.
The certificate indicates the compatibility of the certification object with the
Requirements of the DS-GVO. Certifiable under current legislation40 are products, processes and services that process personal information.

40

Art. 43 para. 1 lit. b DS-GMO refers to EN-ISO / IEC 17065/2012, the requirements for
Provides sites that certify products, processes and services.
29

Chapter 1

focus

In order to guarantee the necessary quality and thus also trustworthiness, the DS-GVO stipulates that only sufficiently qualified certification bodies are required
Issue Privacy Certificates. The qualification of the certification bodies is ensured by their prior accreditation and regular monitoring.
Accreditation means that a potential certification body itself has a
Passed the exam and thus gets the permission to certify. Around
To be accredited, the certification body must first identify the criteria that it would like to use as the benchmark for its certification. These criteria are submitted to the supervisory authority, which assesses and approves them if they
sufficient to establish lawful data processing. The main yardstick here is the DS-GVO. Further legal regulations must be depending on
the nature of the object of certification and the circumstances of its use. These may be the BDSG, the state data protection laws and sector-specific regulations, eg. B. from the Ssocial law or
professional regulations for the protection of the secrets of patients
Patients. In addition to the legal regulations, the certification criteria can also refer to national and international standards, eg. B. on
the standards of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for the
Security of information technology.
On the other hand, the certification body must meet requirements with regard to a sufficient professional qualification of its employees, a suitable organizational structure as well as clearly defined processes and impartiality or
To fulfill independence. There is a general international standard for this
EN-ISO / IEC 17065/2012, which is responsible for the accreditation of certification bodies in
in very different fields, from organic farming to building materials for the
Construction of buildings. It was an important task of the German and other European supervisory authorities in 2018 to supplement this standard with requirements that should specifically apply to data protection accreditation.
The Berlin supervisory authority has participated intensively in this. Was worked out
a provisional amended version of the standard now (as of December 2018)
submitted to the European Data Protection Board for its opinion.

30

1.4 Privacy Certification - The Road to Privacy Seal

1.4.2 Procedure of the accreditation process
The supervisory authorities and the German Accreditation Body (DAkkS) work closely together in the process of accreditation of certification bodies.41
The DAkkS controls the overall process of accreditation, accepts the applications
contrary, takes over the formal examination steps. The supervisory authorities examine and approve the certification criteria and, in addition to the practicalities, check in particular the independence of the applicants and theirs
Expertise and decide, together with the DAkkS, whether an accreditation
is granted or not. Following a positive decision, they grant applicants the power to act as a certification body.
Specifically, the accreditation is as follows:
program check
1.
Application phase for the
program check

Second
Program review and
Approval of the criteria

accreditation
Third
Application phase accreditation /
authority issuing

4th
evaluation phase

5th
Accreditation Phase /
authority issuing

6th
monitoring phase

The actual accreditation procedure is preceded by a program review. The program review deals with the certification criteria (what should the company to be certified do after the presentation of the certification body?) And the planned procedure of the certification body (eg
Does the certification body want to determine whether the criteria are being met?).

41

Art. 43 DS-GVO, § 39 BDSG
31

Chapter 1

focus

The criteria and accompanying processes together form the certification program, hence the name of this phase.
The German supervisory authorities work to create the requirements
and procedures for the evaluation of certification criteria and programs
also close together. This is intended to achieve comparability of the accreditations of the individual supervisory authorities. Furthermore, the necessary quality of the certification programs with their certification criteria should be guaranteed by a systematic procedure during the program check.
At the same time, the test transparency is secured.
If a European Data Protection Seal is sought, there is an additional one
Approval of the certification criteria by the European Data Protection Board required.42
The actual accreditation process begins with the submission of the accreditation application to the DAkkS. When reviewing the application, this binds the
responsible authority in the accreditation procedure.
The review is followed by the review. In the course of the appraisal, the responsible supervisory authority checks together with the DAkkS
an assessment team fulfilling the requirements of the certification body
on site. Finally, the evaluation team is convinced of the quality of the work of the certification body by its support in auditing a certification body
exemplary customer.
After a documentary review and assessment, an accreditation committee evaluates the results of the assessment and decides on the granting of the accreditation. Two-thirds of this committee consists of members of the relevant supervisory authority and one-third of members of the DAkkS. The
DAkkS certifies the successful completion of the accreditation phase
an accreditation letter and the accreditation certificate. The accreditation

42

Art. 42 para. 5 sentence 2, Art. 70 para. 1 lit. o DS-GMO
32

1.4 Privacy Certification - The Road to Privacy Seal

It is then added to the list of the accredited bodyn the DAkkS
added.
According to Art 43 para. 4 DS-GVO, accreditation is limited to a maximum of five years
Years and can be extended if the criteria are
On the basis of the successful accreditation, the competent supervisory authority may authorize the certification body to operate nationwide with the certification program without further recognition by other supervisory authorities.
The competence of a post is also granted after a granted accreditation at regular intervals by the DAkkS and the responsible supervisory authority
supervised. In this way it is ensured that the certification body the
permanently fulfilled the respective accreditation requirements. If deviations are detected in the control assessments, this may
Suspension or suspension of accreditation. This can also have an effect on already issued certificates.

1.4.3 Monitoring certification and development of requirements
The certifications granted are also regular by the supervisory authorities
For this purpose, the accredited certification bodies inform the
competent authority for the issue, renewal or revocation
Requested certifications.44 Are the requirements for certification
the competent authority can instruct the certification body not to grant or revoke certification.45
Also, accreditations become regular within the framework of intermediate examinations
checked. This includes document-level and on-site audits.

43
44
45

Art. 57 para. 1 lit. o DS-GMO
Art. 43 para. 1 sentence 1, para. 5 DS-GVO
Art. 58 para. 2 lit. h DS-GMO
33

Chapter 1

focus

As a result, the supervisory authorities will in the future be permanently involved in the processes of accreditation and certification. The requirements for criteria and programs must be regularly adapted to future developments.
For this, the data protection supervisory authorities have set up a working group,
who works on the continuous development of the accreditation process in the area of ​​data protection.
Regular working meetings with DAkkS ensure smooth cooperation. Recent developments in the field of accreditation
and privacy can be considered promptly.
Not only by participating in the certification process, but also
By creating informational materials and lectures, the
Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information contributes to the
Fulfillment of the legal mandate 46 to promote the introduction of data protection-specific certification procedures.
Certificates, privacy seals and test marks will be a quality feature for the processing of personal data in the future. This will be the
Citizens an instrument for better orientation in one
both dynamic and fundamental rights relevant area given to the hand. Businesses can use this to align their processes, products
and services to the requirements of the DS-GVO. By the
Approval of certification criteria, the accreditation process, the
Grant of authority to act as certification body, as well as through
the regular control of accredited companies and supervision
the certifications granted by the regulatory authorities and the DAkkS
in the future the quality of certificates in the area of ​​data protection secured.

46

Art. 42 para. 1 DS-GVO
34

1.5 Advertising according to the DS-GVO

1.5

Advertising according to the DS-GVO

rem mailbox addressed to them addressed advertising mail or advertising by e-mail, fax, SMS or receive a call, although they the advertiser
previously did not give your consent. Sometimes they did not have any
Contact the advertisers and ask where they got their contact details from. Also, advertisers who are unsure how the General Data Protection Regulation affects planned advertising and whether and in which
The extent to which they are allowed to use data for advertising measures in the future is addressed
reinforced with advice requests to us.

1.5.1

definition

The concept of advertising encompasses all measures according to the European definition
of companies, self-employed, associations and associations with the aim of the
Sales of goods or the provision of services.47 Thus
In addition to direct product-related advertising, indirect sales promotion - for example in the form of image advertising or sponsorship -
detected. Under the advertising term fall beside classical advertising booklets and
catalogs also Christmas and birthday mail, newsletter and customer satisfaction queries.48
The different forms of communication or communication channels of personal
addressed advertising by post, e-mail, fax or in telephone form are subject to data protection lawto judge.

47
48

Art. 2 lit. a of Directive 2006/114 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
12 December 2006 on misleading and comparative advertising (OJ EU L 376, p.
See judgment of the Federal Court of Justice (BGH) of 12 September 2013 - I ZR 208/12
and BGH judgment of 10 July 2018 - VI ZR 225/17, available at http: //www.bundes
gerichtshof.de/DE/Entscheidungen/entscheidungen_node.html
35

From practice

Numerous complaints reach us from citizens, who in their

Chapter 1

focus

1.5.2

new regulations

With the entry into force of the DS-GVO the previous detailed regulations for the
Advertising is not required.49 The DS-BER does not contain any special system for the admissibility of advertising, therefore, in principle, the general provisions on the processing of personal data are applicable.
It is still the case that advertising is only allowed if there is either a legal permit or the consent of the advertised person.
The processing of personal data by advertisers may be lawful if they protect the legitimate interests of advertisers
or is required by third parties and unless the interests or fundamental rights
and fundamental freedoms of advertisers outweigh. This applies in particular
Measures even if the affected person is a child.50
The data subject must not have objected to direct mail.
The General Data Protection Regulation provides for an explicit right of objection.51
In each specific case, the interests of advertisers or third parties as well as those affected must be weighed up. direct mail
can basically be considered a legitimate interest processing
However, for the required
Balance of interests also always to ask what applicants can reasonably expect objectively or may. The decisive factor is therefore whether the processing
personal data for certain areas of the social sphere is typically accepted or rejected and whether it corresponds to reason, disadvantages
for the right of self-determination.
Advertisers must be able to demonstrate that they weigh this balance of interest
actually done and that the result is in their favor.
Furthermore, they must face the interests involved in the balancing
expressly name the person concerned.53 This may be the case, for example
49
50
51
52
53

Section 28 (3) BDSG a. F.
Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DS-GMO
Art. 21 DS-GVO
Recital 47 DS-BER
Art. 5 para. 2, Art. 13 para. 1 lit. d DS-GMO
36

1.5 Advertising according to the DS-GVO

the privacy policy. Inform the advertiser at the time of
Data collection transparent and comprehensive on a planned commercial
Use of the data, the expectation of those advertised usually goes as far as ensuring that their customer data is used accordingly. However, through
Transparency of the statutory considerations pursuant to Art. 6 para. 1 sentence 1 lit. f
DS-GVO can not be extended arbitrarily, because the expectations of the objective
Yardstick of reason must be measured.
In this context, the general principles of the DSGVO54 must always be observed. Thus the data processing must be fair and comprehensible (naming the sources of the data).
If it is based on a selection criterion for a division into advertising groups
comes and no additional knowledge gain results from the grouping,
the balancing of interests will usually be in favor of the advertisers.
Protection-worthy interests, on the other hand, are generally unlikely to prevail if
following an order all customers alike
a promotional catalog or an advertising letter for the purchase of additional products of the advertisers is sent by mail.
The creation of advertising profiles or the removal of data from social networks for direct marketing purposes, however, will be allowed only with prior consent. More intervention-intensive measures, such as automated selection procedures for creating detailed profiles, behavioral predictions
Analyzes leading to additional findings also argue in favor of
that the interest of the advertised in the exclusion of data processing outweighs. In these cases, it is called profiling, which requires the collection of a
Consent prior to data processing is required. An indication of one
existing right of objection is not sufficient in these cases.
With regard to the transmission of data for advertising purposes to third parties and the
Use of external addresses is generally to be assumed that the interests of the persons advertised must be given a higher priority than the
Interested advertisers or third parties in the transmission or use of
54

Art. 5 para. 1 DS-GVO
37

Chapter 1

focus

Foreign addresses for advertising. The expectationthe affected persons
is also determined by whether a relevant and appropriate relationship
between them and the advertisers, z. A customer relationship. In the case of a disclosure of personal data to third parties outside this customer relationship, this is usually not the case. Usually will
Customers do not expect their contact details from companies,
where they z. B. have bought, sold to address dealers for advertising purposes
be asked without being asked.

1.5.3

consent

Processing for promotional purposes may continue to be voluntary and
independent consent of the advertised person.
The consent must be confirmed by a clear affirmative action in
written, electronic or even oral.55
Silence, already pre-set, ticked boxes or inactivity of the person concerned are not sufficient. Note in this
But in particular the new information and documentation obligations of the persons responsible.56 The data subjects are in a transparent, understandable and easily accessible form in one
clear and simple language.57 The advertised person must also
always be advised of the possibility of a cancellation.58
Consent can be ineffective, especially if a strong
Imbalance between the responsible persons and the persons concerned
The coupling of a service with one does not
necessary data processing against the voluntary nature of consent.

55
56
57
58
59

Recital 32 DS-BER
See also the Working Paper (WP 260) of the Art.29 Group, available at http: //
ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/news-overview.cfm
Art. 12 para. 1 DS-GVO
Art. 7 (3) and Art. 21 (3) and (4) DS-GVO
Recital 43 DS-BER
38

1.5 Advertising according to the DS-GVO

The effectiveness of the consent is denied even if the candidates do not give it separately according to individual processing operations
although this would be appropriate in the specific case.
It is the responsibility of the advertisers to demonstrate compliance with the lawfulness requirements of data processing and the existence of a legally valid consent.61 The DS-GVO, unlike the old Federal Data Protection Act, no longer requires a written form in this respect. But this one
Being able to comply with an obligation is advisable to get one regularly
Consent in writing with handwritten signature or at least in
Text form (eg e-mail) to strive. For the electronic declaration of consent, the so-called double-opt-in procedure is required (depending on the specific type of contact: e-mail or SMS), whereby the legal proof requirements must be taken into account when logging. Are to be held
the content of the consent and the entire opt-in procedure.62

1.5.4

change of purpose

Personal data that was not originally collected for advertising purposes
can still be used for promotional purposes, provided that the new
Purpose is compatible with the original purpose
Responsible a so-called compatibility test taking into account in the
DS-GMO regulated criteria.64 Otherwise, consent is required.

60
61
62
63
64

Art. 7 para. 4 DS-GVO
Art. 5 para. 2 and Art. 7 para. 1 DS-GVO
Art. 5 para. 2 DS-GVO and BGH judgment of 10 February 2011, I ZR 164/09, available at
http://www.bundesgerichtshof.de/DE/Entscheidungen/entscheidungen_node.html
Art. 6 para. 4 DS-GVO
Recital 50 DS-BER
39

Chapter 1

focus

1.5.5

Law against unfair competition
and DS-GMO

Regardless of data protection law, e-mail advertising and other advertising with electronic mail as well as telephone and fax advertising must comply with the provisions of the Unfair Competition Act (UWG)
remain applicable according to the new provisions of the GDPR. These rules,
in which cases an unacceptable harassment of the advertised persons is assumed and an advertisement of this kind is inadmissible. If the UWG for certain
Advertising forms and ways of contact detect an unreasonable harassment, this is
in the context of the balancing of interests of the DS-GVO.
Accordingly, e-mail advertising and other advertising with electronic mail as well as telephone or fax advertising to consumers is only possible after explicit, separate consent
allowed. Other things can apply to e-mail advertising if the affected
People were once customers or customers of the company, with
similar products are advertised and given a possibility of opposition.65

1.5.6

Adhere to advertising conflict

The advertising contradiction of a data subject can protect himself against the Downer and / or the advertisers as responsible persons.
Both must consider this advertising contradiction in future, z. B. by
Inclusion in an advertising lock file. The people responsible for the effective
Enforce the right of objection of the data subject, for example by forwarding the opposition. The implementation of the
Objection must be made immediately.

65

Art. 7 (3) UWG
40

1.6 The new Berlin Data Protection Act - Hopefully not the last

The sending of personally addressed advertising by post is only allowed if either a consent or a legal permission to do so
is present. For e-mail advertising and other advertising with electronic mail
as well as telephone and fax advertising, the requirements of the UWG must be observed in addition.

1.6

The new Berlin Data Protection Act -
Hopefully not the last stand

With the coming into force of the General Data Protection Regulation on May 25, 2018
the reform process of European data protection law was by no means over. Rather, this resulted in a huge need for adaptation of the federal and
Land legislation, which has not been fully completed to this day
ist.66 The Berlin data protection law is largely determined by the Berlin Data Protection Act (BlnDSG), which was adopted on May 31, 2018 by the Berlin House of Representatives. It regulates the conditions under which
The public authorities of the state of Berlin may process personal data in principle.
In addition to the adaptation of the general Berlin data protection law to the DSGVO, this law also made the EU data protection directive for police and police
Judiciary, the so-called JI Directive EU 2016/680, transposed into national law.
This will also regulate the processing of personal data by the police and judicial authorities. As before, however, the BlnDSG also
further supplemented by various sector-specific regulations in various special laws.67
Our authority was intensively involved in the legislative process. We have
made several written statements and made several critical remarks in the relevant committee meetings and plenary.

66
67

See 1.8
See 1.8
41

Chapter 1

focus

Unfortunately, we could not prevail with all our concerns. As a result, unfortunately, it can be stated that the Berlin Data Protection Act has been passed to some
Entities which curtail the rights of citizens guaranteed in the GDPR.68 In the
Strengthening the rights of victims is, however, a central concern of the
European data protection reform. Affected rights put the people in
the ability to self-determined privacy. On the basis of information and information, they should themselves be able to establish transparency about the data processed about their person. This is a prerequisite for enforcing the correctness of the stored data by means of corrections and deletions
to be able to. All the more regrettable is that the Berlin legislature in this
Restricted areas that are no longer covered by the DS-GVO: eg, access rights are not restricted
if the provision of information would jeopardize the prosecution of criminal offenses or the security of the country, as provided for by the European rules.69
Rather, the denial of information should be allowed even with comparatively insignificant fine proceedings, such as holding in the parking ban.70
In addition, certain decisions on a refusal of information
not even verifiable by the independent data protection supervisory authority. This is always the case under the new Berlin law when
individual Senate members refuse to provide information on the grounds that
there is a potential risk to the Federation or the Länder.71 A review of the validity of this statement of reasons is required under the new legislation
Berlin regulation just as impossible as a control of legality
the specific data processing by the person concerned or by our agency.
Other powers of the data protection supervisory authority were also provided by the Berliner
House of Representatives clearly limited. Especially in public areas it is
questionable, if we can do our job effectively. So we were

68
69
70
71

§§ 23 ff. BlnDSG
Art. 23 para. 1 DS-GVO
Section 24 (1) sentence 2 no. 2 BlnDSG
Section 24 (3) BlnDSG
42

1.6 The new Berlin Data Protection Act - Hopefully not the last

specifically denies the DS-BER the power to impose fines on public authorities and other public authorities.72
In the area of ​​the JI Directive, the Berlin legislature went even further and, contrary to the wording of the directive, granted our authority only a right to object.73 If the addressee does not comply with a complaint, then there is only the possibilitythe
the relevant parliamentary committee, which in turn also
has no legally binding remedies. The recording on
The agenda does not need to be short-term, so that a breach of data protection may persist for a long time, without concrete consequences
to be able to intervene. The possibility to bring about a judicial clarification
also does not exist. This rule is contrary to the requirements of the JHA Directive, which requires that the supervisory authority must be able to:
give legally binding instructions.74 As examples of such effective
Powers are given by way of example z. For example, the power to data processors
to instruct processing operations in accordance with data protection laws
bring, and the power, a temporary or final restriction
processing, including a ban. Contrary to the definition of the JHA Directive, 75 which requires the supervisory authority to
of this Directive and its implementing rules
Therefore, our authority does not have the
necessary powers to perform this task effectively.
It is to be hoped that the BlnDSG will be improved at the end of the parliamentary term in the evaluation of the points criticized by us.

72
73
74
75

§ 28 BlnDSG
§ 13 para. 2 BlnDSG
Art. 47 (2) JHA Directive
Art. 46 para. 1 lit. a JI Directive
43

Chapter 1

focus

When adapting the BlnDSG to the DS-GVO and the JI Directive, it has
The legislature missed, a courageous signal in the direction of protection of fundamental rights
to put. The data subjects contained in the DS-GVO were restricted. The powers of the authority appointed to secure these rights have been curtailed.

From practice

1.7

Facebook fanpages and the common
Responsibility for data processing

In June 201876, the European Court of Justice found that Facebook fanpage operators, together with Facebook, are responsible for processing the personal data of fans page visitors. The decision is based on the before 25 May
2018 Data Protection Directive. The considerations can be but in the
DS-GMO time transferred, since the definition of jointly responsible themselves
did not change. In contrast to the old legal situation sees the DS-GVO for the
However, those responsible have additional requirements in Art. 26 GDPR. After that, they are obliged to stipulate in a transparent agreement who fulfills which obligations under the DS-GVO. Furthermore
the agreement must have the respective actual functions and relationships
duly reflect the co-responsibility of the data subjects and the essential content of the
be made available to the persons concerned.

1.7.1

Hearing proceedings in Berlin

The decision of the ECJ is trend-setting, because it is then irrelevant for the data protection responsibility, whether the processing
legally or economically "
Eye level "act or z. B. are infrastructural dependent on each other. In Er76

Judgment of the ECJ of 5 June 2018, Case C-210/16 Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig-Holstein
44

1.7 Facebook Fanpages

Therefore, those responsible can not be behind large platforms and
Infrastructure providers "hiding" their offers
use.77 Also several months after the publication of the judgment of the ECJ
However, we could not recognize that fan page operators in Berlin, especially public authorities, consequences of the
Judgment. Even Facebook had nothing official to hear,
In particular, no further agreement was required under the DS-BER
for joint responsibility.78
In September, the Conference of Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the Federation and the Länder (DSK) issued a resolution79 stating that the operation of a fan page, as offered by Facebook, without an agreement under Art. 26
DS-GMO is illegal. In addition, the DSK pointed out that fanpage
Operators (regardless of whether they are public or private)
non-public responsible) is the legality of the common to
ensure responsible data processing and can prove it
müssen.80
Shortly thereafter, Facebook released a supplemental agreement, based on
a shared responsibility. However, we have doubts that the information that Facebook has published so far and in connection with the
Supplementary Agreement has been made sufficient to be accountable for the lawfulness of the processing of the data ofTo be able to drop visitors to the fan page. We therefore have a number
of bodies of the Berlin state administration, political parties as well as companies and organizations u. a. from the commercial, publishing and finance industries in
Berlin written. At the moment we hear these on the privacy law Fra77

78
79

80

The ECJ makes it clear that the fact that organizations and persons
use platform set up by Facebook to avail themselves of the associated services, not to comply with their obligations in the
Protection of personal data, judgment of the ECJ of
5 June 2018, Case C-210/16, para. 40
See Art. 26 DS-BER
"Decision of the DSK to Facebook Fanpages" Dusseldorf, 5 September 2018, available
at https://www.datenschutzkonferenz-online.de/media/dskb/20180905_dskb_facebook_fanpages.pdf
See the accountability set out in Art. 5 para. 2 DS-BER
45

Chapter 1

focus

orders. In particular, we want to know which specific data processing takes place on which legal basis the data processing takes place
and how the information of the persons concerned is ensured.81

1.7.2

Interpretation and scope of the common
Processing of personal data

As part of the fanpage process, the ECJ pointed out that Facebook
so-called "page insights" for the site operators, ie
Statistics about the visitors of the site and the type of use. For the court it played a big role that the fan page operators
and operators by setting certain parameters (eg evaluations
according to age and gender) according to their target audience at the creation
the statistics through Facebook .82 remained open whether the common
Responsibility of the site operators beyond the creation of such site insights should extend to subsequent or further data processing by Facebook. On the other hand speaks that the ECJ the
Site insights and the parameterization by the site operators in the foreground. However, the ECJ saw, apparently independent of the parameterization, especially with such visitors
the Fanpage, which are not registered on Facebook, an increased responsibility
the site operator. In these cases, so the ECJ, solve this
simply calling up the fan page automatically processes the processing of their personal data.83 The court thus far extended the concept of the responsible processing of personal data.84

81

82
83
84

We have published the questionnaire in the consultation process at https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/informationen/2018-BlnBDI-Fragenkatalog_Fanpages.pdf.
Judgment of the ECJ of 5 June 2018, Case C-210/16, para. 39
Judgment of the ECJ of 5 June 2018, Case C-210/16, para. 41
Accordingly, the ECJ pointed out in the decision that it was not necessary for each or each jointly responsible person to have access to the relevant
has personal data, cf. Judgment of the ECJ of 5 June 2018, Case
C-210/16, marg. 38
46

1.7 Facebook Fanpages

The ECJ affirmed this interpretation in another decision from the
last year. Shortly after the fanpage decision, the court ruled 85 that
a religious community, together with its members acting as heralds, is responsible for the processing of personal data. In this case, the ECJ made it sufficient for the data protection responsibility, that the religious community the announcement activity
organized, coordinated and encouraged the members.86
Another legal clarification of the concept of shared responsibility
is not far away. In a recent case, the ECJ has to deal with the issue of
Integration of Social Plugins87 into websites and with the responsibility for the
dealing with triggered data processing. In December, the
Advocate General published his Opinion in the proceedings.88 He comes
to conclude that the operators of websites use the
Third parties whose plugins they have integrated into their web pages as common
Responsible persons are to be regarded. The Advocate General hereby relies on the survey
and transmission of personal data, which are caused by the plugins, but suggests at the same time, the joint responsibility
to restrict such phases to a whole chain of data processing operations in which a participating actor actually contributes to the decision on the means and purposes of data processing. In the case of Social
Plugins is therefore limited to the joint responsibility of the website operator in question according to the proposals of the Advocate General
the Phand to provide a large part of all administrative services in the future. We have
Intensively supported the introduction of the service account and supported the leading Senate Department for Home Affairs and Sport with regard to the implementation of data protection regulations.
The draft law for improving the online access to administrative services of the Berlin administration (Online Access Act Berlin) 94 was taken note of by the Senate on presentation of the Senator for Home Affairs and Sport and
should be introduced to Parliament after referral to the Council of Mayors. Thus the course is set, by means of a single registration in the
Service account not only administrative services of the country Berlin electronically in
To be able to claim, but also those of other states and the
Federation via its portal network.
According to the Berlin E-Government Act, the Berlin administration is obliged to file its files electronically by 1 January 2023 at the latest
92
93

94
95

JB 2017, 2.1
Application for resident parking permit, a daycare voucher for citizens
and citizens as well as the use of the single point of contact Berlin for enterprises
JB 2017, 2.1, p. 46
§ 7 para. 1 sentence 1 EGovG Bln, see also JB 2016, 2.1
50

2.1 Digitization projects in Berlin

is by appropriate technical-organizational measures according to the respective
State of the art ensure that the principles of proper record keeping and the standards applicable to the Berlin administration, in particular
with regard to data protection and data security.
The electronic file allows a faster and more efficient processing of tasks, which not only benefits the citizens, but also
the employees of the Berlin administration. Through them, files and other
Documents transmitted electronically within authorities and with each other
can be. This is in any case a safe, the current state of
Technology appropriate communication infrastructure use. In particular
the transmitted data must be protected from unauthorized access and from change.96 In perspective, it should also be citizens
allows you to retrieve the status of the transaction processing itself via the service account Berlin, which, on the one hand, provides faster notification
the person concerned, but also the employees of the
Authorities are relieved of demands.
As in the electronic file naturally also very sensitive data too
also technical and organizational measures must be taken
which allow the processing of data requiring a high level of protection. We
have intensively accompanied the leading Senate Department for Home Affairs and Sport in the determination of protection needs. In addition, we were involved in the preparation of the nationwide bidding process for the electronic file
In this way, they were able to ensure that data protection regulations and aspects were already taken into account in the tender process. It
It is planned to launch the tendering procedure in 2019.
The service account as well as the electronic file are flanked by the new basic service "digital application", which in the future will be a media-break-free application
with uniform appearance and operating concept for all electronic
To enable applications in the Berlin administration. As with the electronic
Act also applies here that because of the potential processing of particularly sensitive data, technical and organizational measures must be taken
96

§ 7 Abs. 2 EGovG Bln
51

Chapter 2

Digital administration

enable the processing of data requiring a high level of protection. Here, too, we have accompanied the determination of protection requirements and brought in further data protection advice.
In connection with the introduction of the electronic file management and transaction processing in the Berlin authorities will continue in not insignificant
Scope Paper documents are incurred, especially in the field of incoming mail.
To include these documents in the electronically-assisted workflow
paper documents are more orderly while respecting the principles
File management and storage in an electronic format.97
In any case, the specifications of the Technical Guideline are to be replaced
Scanning of the Federal Office for Security in Information Technology98. To find a uniform, secure and economical solution throughout Berlin,
The Senate Department for Home Affairs and Sport initiated the document input management (DIM) project. We will also accompany this project.
The introduction of digital administrative services must be for citizens
Citizens are transparent, secure and protected by data protection.

From practice

2.2

Aid Online

The Specialized Procedure Aid Application Online (BAO) soll allow eligible employees and pensioners of the state of Berlin online
Apply for assistance via web browser or app, track the processing status and receive notifications. In addition, it should be possible
Report master data changes. As part of the application, the functionalities will be provided in stages.
Already four years ago we were informed by the state administration office that the conditions for the application for the BAO are being created
should. In this early phase of the project, we had the Landesverwaltungsamt97
98

§ 8 EGovG Bln
BSI TR-03138 Replacing Scan (RESISCAN)
52

2.2 Aid online

shared what documents for a systematic and final assessment
of the process are needed. These are z. B. an IT security concept as well
Concepts for the organization of the access authorizations, the logging of successful data access as well as the deletion of the data.
After some considerable delays, we received documents, however
had to be reworked or completed or step by step
were submitted after completion. In May 2018 the project became again
added. At a first workshop, the significance of the project became clear
confirmed and decided to continue the project. Since then is progressing
We are making good progress with the project with our participation.
The modified from 25 May 2018 with the General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO)
The legal status of the project means that a data protection impact assessment has to be carried out, as the beneficiaries' medical bills processed by the procedure are extensively processed
health data99 and thus particularly sensitive data. A privacy impact assessment is a specialized tool for describing
Assessing and mitigating risks to the rights and freedoms of individuals in the processing of personal data.100 A privacy impact assessment must be carried out by the respective controller, in
In this case, the Landesverwaltungsamt.
In a first phase, the risks were assessed accordingly
Procedure using the Standard Privacy Model (SDM) .101 where
Identified risks for which appropriate remedial action must be taken. In the context of the continuation of the data protection impact assessment must
It will now be examined whether the planned measures sufficiently cover the risks
mitigate.

99
100
101

Art. 35 para. 3 lit. b DS-GMO
Further information at https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/wirtschaft-und-verwaltung/datenschutz-folgenabschaetzung/
SDM: The Standard Privacy Model provides support for privacy advice and review, and for creating a privacy impact assessment
on the basis of uniform warranty objectives (https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/
fileadmin / user_upload / pdf / orientlierungshilfen / 2018 SDM.pdf).
53

Chapter 2

Digital administration

Further advances in the process, such as the development of a user-friendly app for mobile devices, are planned. For this then must also
a consideration of the risks as part of a data protection impact assessment
respectively.
A data protection compliant planning and arrangement of the future-oriented procedure aid application on-line could under our accompaniment on the
Be taken away. The subsequent steps and the future
We will continue to pay close attention to planning.

54

3.1 threatening letters to the left scene with data from police databases

3

Interior

3.1

Threatening letters to the left scene with data from
Police databases

various institutions of the left-wing autonomous scene have received letters,
the u. a. Names and photos of several concrete persons contained. In the
A total of 45 persons were named by name, and 21 of them were photographed and provided with information that apparently only
could come from police or judicial authorities. The sender was a
"Center for Political Correctness" and threatened to pass on the data of these persons and their family members to the police or extreme right-wing groups.
Immediately after the publication of the media reports, we contacted the police and asked for a short-term opinion on what measures the police took to clarify the facts. As the first investigation
We recommended reviewing the accesses to the records in the police databases to the persons named in the threatening letter.
The police then informed us that they had a preliminary investigation against unknown persons for violation of the Berlin Data Protection Act (BlnDSG) and
infringement of private secrets. According to our recommendation, a log data query was made to ascertain
to clarify whether data of those affected in temporal proximity to the letter versesout
were retrieved from the police databases and whether the call was due to business reasons. The evaluation of data queries and further investigations
with the involvement of the Forensic Institute, however, no results had been found.
We recommended further concrete measures to the police, which were partly taken into account by the investigating state criminal investigation office. Insbeson55

From practice

At the beginning of the year, we learned through press releases that

Chapter 3

Interior

In addition we recommended the examination of an original copy of the letters sent from the following points of view: Identification of the serial number
of the printer used on the basis of the printed image (so-called "Machine Identification
Code "), conclusions on the origin of the letter by analysis of the paper used and determination of the author of the letter by
possibly imprinted fingerprints.
When in the meantime affected persons turned to us confidentially, we were able to briefly inspect an original letter and find out,
that this color photos contained in good resolution. This spoke against that of the
Police initially speculated that were used in the preparation of the letters photocopies.
In view of the information available to us, we submitted on 26 March 2018
Criminal application against unknown for violation of the Berlin data protection law.102 In the further course of our examination, we unfortunately received only limited information from the Berlin police. We were first informed in mid-April
that on the basis of an order from the public prosecutor's office, the further communication was to be conducted directly through the competent public prosecutor. We both had to
The police as well as the prosecution repeatedly point out that the
Police Commissioner in Berlin as a data processing agency opposite BlnBDI
is required to provide information, even if the public prosecutor's office carries out a preliminary criminal procedure.103
After several inquiries, we received in August from the police information that a police officer of the state of Berlin identified as a suspect
and this has granted the production of the letter. The prosecution finally told us in early October, against the accused was one
Penalty order, which has been in force since the end of August. There
However, we still have no knowledge of where in the
sent letters contained personal data and how
the author of the letters has reached them, our examination continues.

102
103

Section 32 (3) BlnDSG a. F. i. V. m. § 32 para. 1 no. 2 Alt. 1 and no. 1 alt. 1 BlnDSG a. F.
§ 54 BlnDSG
56

3.2 Processing of personal information in police databases

The use of threatening letters is a particularly serious incident. she
not only constitutes a criminal offense, but also damages the public's trust in the security forces, whose task in particular
the prevention of crime.

3.2

Processing of personal information
in police databases

personal assessments of persons, so-called personal references (PHW),
after having been this for over twenty years due to criticism from the Conference of the Federal Data Protection Commissioner and countries not for their work
The reintroduction of the clues was unsuccessfully rejected.
Personal information used throughout the country includes the term "mental and behavioral disorders" (PSYV), which may be up to
a corresponding resolution of the Conference of Interior Ministers in 2015
"Mentally ill" means.105 Such personal information should in particular serve to protect the data subject or to protect police officers.106
Due to requests from citizens for the storage of personal information in police databases, we have again written to the Senate Department for Home Affairs and Sports on this topic and
pointed out that we continue to have significant doubts about the legality
storing the reference "Mental and behavioral disorders".
In our opinion, such an indication is not required for police purposes and is extremely stigmatizing for those affected.

104
105
106

JB 2012, 3.8
See Drs. 17/2406 of the House of Representatives Berlin
See § 16 (6) no. 1 Federal Criminal Police Act (BKAG)
57

From practice

For some years now, the Berlin police have been creating and using certain po-

Chapter 3

Interior

In particular, it is not clear why the inclusion of such a warning for security or intrusion by the police be necessary
should. As a rule, mentally ill persons do not pose any dangers due to their illness, which has to be warded off by the police. As far as in individual cases such dangersNevertheless, the inclusion of the
also possible personal reference "violent" conceivable and
sufficient.
The personal reference "Mental and behavioral disorders" should
lack of necessity from the list of references that are given in police databases by the Berlin police to perform their duties
can be taken out.

From practice

3.3

Vulnerability in the police
Database POLIKS?

A police officer complained to us that unauthorized access to the police database POLIKS due to insufficient security requirements
possible. One could by multiple input of a wrong password
lock any access to POLIKS and then over a telephone
Hotline without further hurdles unlock this access again and get a new one
Password.
In the subsequent audit we were confirmed to have access to
POLIKS will be blocked if multiple wrong password is entered.
For unlocking the affected users could then
contact the central IT administration. This will raise a lock on the account,
if the notification is confirmed by the supervisor or supervisor of the person concerned. After unlocking the password, the password is unchanged; it will not forgive new. We have none against this procedure
data protection concerns.
On the other hand, if the user requires an account lockout, they will need it
new password, she or he must contact the police after informing the police
58

3.3 Vulnerability in POLIKS police database?

competent local IT administration, after identification of the
give the person concerned a new password. The concrete identification procedure is not uniformly regulated throughout Berlin. The police password
According to our statement, the directive does not contain any specific information, but merely the general requirement of proof of identity.
According to the police, this takes place either by presentation of the official ID card, verification by the supervisor or personal recognition of the employee
or the person concerned.
We then called for the creation and enforcement of a single entity - level regulation that would ensure the safe identification of the
each affected person guarantees. In particular, it should be specified when
which of the means described for identity verification in a password re-allocation application and how this should be done in each case specifically. To later
Checking - especially in the case of a suspected abuse - should also be documented by the local IT administrators in order to assign new passwords as well as the type of identity verification. Furthermore, we have recommended periodic random checks of the
make local password re-assignments.
The police have agreed to revise their password policy.
Unauthorized access to data in POLIKS is fined and even constitutes a criminal offense if it results in damage or enrichment
.107 The police are responsible for providing the necessary
to undertake technical and organizational measures with a view to password re-allocation in order to ensure a level of protection appropriate to the risk when processing personal data in POLIK.108
This also prevents misdemeanors and offenses.

107
108

§§ 70, 29 BlnDSG
§ 50 para. 1 BlnDSG
59

Chapter 3

From practice

3.4

Interior

Control of the accreditation process
at the G20 summit

In July 2017, the G20 summit109 took place in Hamburg. In order to gain access to the press center, journalists needed accreditation from the Federal Press Office. Prerequisites for accreditation were proof
journalistic activity and a security clearance. After being in the
In the run-up to the G20 summit, the security authorities made a new assessment of the situation, as a result of which the accreditations already granted were reviewed. On recommendation of the federation
Kriminalamts decided the Federal Press Office, a total of 32 journalists
and journalists to withdraw the accreditation again. Complainants complained
in particular, that the recommendations of the BKA on the basis of
Information on criminal proceedings have been issued, some
lagged for years.
The findings of the BKA were mainly due to data obtained from
the national police authorities in the nationwide information system
INPOL had been discontinued. Therefore, we have an exam in terms of
Storage of data in INPOL initiated by the Berlin police.
Prerequisite for the transmission of data to the BKA or for the storage of data in the BKAOn the one hand, the use of databases is one of transnational, international or substantial criminal offenses
Meaning.110 In this case, a so-called "relevance check" has to be carried out. To the
others may use personal data of the accused and of persons
who are suspected of a criminal offense, are only processed under certain conditions. On the basis of a so - called "negative prognosis" it has to be examined whether because of the
Type or execution of the act or the personality of the person concerned Reason to
It is assumed that future criminal proceedings against the accused or
Suspects are to lead.111

109
110
111

Summit of the Group of Twenty Major Industrialized and Emerging Countries
Section 2 (1) Federal Criminal Police Act (BKAG)
§ 8 para. 2 BKA-old or now § 18 para. 1, 2 BKAG
60

3.4 Control of the accreditation process at the G20 summit

In connection with the documentation and execution of the relevance checks as well as the negative prognoses we have found structural errors of the Berlin police. It has to be done when setting the data
Tests or considerations not documented, but only later for
formulated the answer to our request. In the absence of case-by-case documentation, it was therefore not clear to us whether the tests required by the BKAG had been carried out by the Berlin police before
Records were fed into INPOL, and whether the legally required
Prerequisites exist.
In addition, in some cases the police had no feedback from the police
Prosecutor's Office to the outcome of the proceedings before, so the legality
the further data storage was not examined. In one case this led
that there was still a case in INPOL, even though the one
Person acquitted by a court for real reasons legally acquitted
had been. It should be clearly stated here that further processing of data is inadmissible if the data subject has been acquitted with legal force or if the opening of the main proceedings is incontestable
rejected or the proceedings not only provisionally ceased, provided that
For the reasons of the decision, it appears that the person concerned did not do the deed
or unlawful.
We have criticized these structural mistakes in the Berlin police and demanded that in relation to the documentation of the tests to be carried out
urgent procedural changes are required. Furthermore, we have called for technical and organizational measures to be taken so that INPOL does not have any
unlawful further processing of personal data of those affected.
The police have now informed us that appropriate organizational
Procedural changes have been made or currently in police
Land system for information, communication and processing technically
would be implemented.

61

Chapter 3

Interior

Storage and processing of personal data in the
Databases maintained by the BKA may only be carried out in accordance with the legal requirements. The check whether these conditions are fulfilled must
Based on the individual case by the registration office at the Berliner
Police take place. For this purpose, suitable technical and organizational prerequisites have to be created.

From practice

3.5

First aid app "Katretter" of Berlin
fire Department

We accompany the Berlin fire department with the introduction of an app that the
Alerting first responders in close proximity to the location of the emergency calls possible if - such. As in a cardiovascular standstill - particularly fast
Help even before the arrival of the ambulance can save lives.
The Berlin Fire Department has already involved us at an early stage of the project. For this we were an app "Katretter" and the process belonging
Software components that are to be operated in data centers and at control centers. The Katretter system is in cooperation with the
Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (Focus) and the CombiRisk GmbH develops and aims in Berlin, but also in other federal states,
operate.
The purpose of the procedure is the alerting of so-called first-aid workers, who happen to be accidental
in the immediate vicinity of a person to be rescued. This is what the
Firefighters in a first project phase Volunteers from their own
Rows that install the app and help in an emergency. Later, too
First-aiders are recruited from other medical professions.
Specifically, the procedure should proceed as follows: If an emergency call, in which the symptoms inquired indicate a cardiac arrest, in the rescue center, so in the Katretter system at the push of a button, the place and more
Data of the emergency call entered. The system now searches in its own databases for first responders who are in the vicinityn, alarmed by stating
62

3.5 first aid app "Katretter" of the Berlin fire department

First aiders found in succession at the place of the emergency until a first responder confirms the acceptance of the mission by means of an app. This person
goes to the place of the emergency and provides "first aid" until the arrival of the
Ambulance. After the assignment, the first aider or first responder is killed
Answering some questions asked about the use of the scientific
Accompaniment serve and possible excessive demands of the Ersthelfenden early
should show.
From a legal point of view was to ensure that participation in the procedure
really voluntary. There must be no pressure on employees of the fire department
be exercised to participate in the procedure. Also the questioning at the end
An assignment must be voluntary and allow omission to answer individual questions. In particular, the last point will be scientific
View often reluctantly, as this makes it difficult to evaluate the results. We
have worked to ensure that they are implemented accordingly.
Another important point is the technical implementation of the project. Around
First aid workers in the vicinity of an emergency site without delay determine
can, the sites of those involved must necessarily be in a database
filed and regularly updated by the apps.
However, it is not necessary that in the database the exact location of
Potential First Aid is saved as being within reach of the few
In the case of use, the exact locations at the
App can be queried. After our consultation will be in the database
the locations of the first-aid workers are listed as circles with a diameter of 500 meters. At each point in the circle, the first responder can
with equal probability.
Moreover, it is not necessary to keep records of previous locations
Retain first aid. This would lead to the creation of motion profiles and thus u. U. a deep insight into the lifestyle of the
allow the persons concerned. For IT security purposes and to test the
Functionality of the method, however, is the storage of log data for
a period of about four days required. Therefore, the location data
now removed after a few hours from these log data.
63

Chapter 3

Interior

Failure to observe the above restrictions would violate the principle of data economy. In addition, the collection of the above-mentioned data might prevent interested parties from registering for the procedure.
Both for the "blur" of the continuously stored locations of the first-time helpers and for the storage duration of the logs, the u. a. location data
have now been found appropriate values ​​that meet both the requirements of data protection and the functionality of the system and
allow the testability of the correct operation.
The app "Katretter" can save lives. With proper design of
Software and processes will avoid having accurate motion profiles of the
First aiders arise.

From practice

3.6

Location of emergency calls at the Berliner
fire Department

Smartphones provide the ability to call the current location of the emergency call
Device and via SMS or Internet to the respective rescue center
to convey. The Berlin Fire Department would like to use this functionality in test operation.
From smartphones via satellite tracking112 or detected by other methods
Location data is often much more accurate than the mobile network's
Radio cell 113 determined location data. Rescuers could find vulnerable people faster by using this system, and thus u. U. save lives.
We were asked by the Berlin fire department for legal and technical evaluation
the so-called "Advanced Mobile Location" (AML) method.

112
113

Location by means of several satellites. There are various systems, such. As the American GPS or the European Galileo.
A radio cell in a mobile network refers to the local area that is served by an antenna of a particular mobile mast.
64

3.6 Locating emergency calls to the Berlin fire department

The Berlin fire brigade was in this regard already in exchange with rescue centers in other states that would like to use the service from 2019 as a test. In view of the nationwide importance
We have the other supervisory authorities for the issues at an early stage
Data protection of the federation and the countries in our examination involved and with
they are asked questions about the location survey service for emergency calls.
The preliminary result is that there are still appropriate legal bases
for the data processing related to the procedureis missing. In particular, there is no specific legal basis for the automated collection of location data from an emergency call via smartphone
Person by the emergency call center of the Berlin fire department. We have the Berliner
In this respect, it is recommended that the fire brigade B. in the Berlin Rescue Service Act to work. On the legal basis in the DS-GVO, which allows data processing, if this is for protection
vital interests of the data subject or any other natural person is necessary114, for reasons of legal certainty under
Recital 46 can be used only in individual cases.
Finally, we have the fire brigade still pointed out that the upstream data processing by the company Google (location and transmission of location data to the control center) in the evaluation
of the procedure can not be disregarded. The problem is that
At present it is still unclear, which data Google uses for the location determination and
whether it is data that has been legally collected. For this
should be further clarified in collaboration with the other regulators
for the data protection of the federation and the countries.
In addition, also ask technical questions. So is one of the used
Location tracking methods have been resorted to WiFi base stations discovered by smartphones nearby. There are fundamental concerns about this process as it regularly tracks the locations of even private WiFi base stations in databases owned by companies such as Google or Apple

114

Art. 6 para. 1 lit. d DS-GMO
65

Chapter 3

Interior

without first obtaining the consent of the owners of the WiFi base stations.
In the case of emergency calls, it is also important that those concerned have deliberately switched off the location functions of the smartphone. However, the smartphones turn on all functions in the event of an emergency call
Identify the location and the mobile Internet access to the locations
to be able to transmit to the emergency caller. In addition, it inevitably comes here
about data transfers to the operating system manufacturers: In order to determine your own location via Wi-Fi location115, a smartphone must be connected to a very large,
online database of the locations of the WiFi base stations discovered by the smartphone. Google or Apple will thus learn that
any smartphone is in a certain location. To answer
is the question of whether and how the operating system manufacturers use this data and
whether the smartphones or their owners are identified
can be.
Although not all legal and technical issues have been resolved
The supervisors have the introduction of a system for locating emergency calls through the possible rescue of human lives
Terminals and the transmission to the respective rescue centers for a
Trial period of three years. During this period, the remaining questions must be clarified.

3.7

Video surveillance after taking effect
the DS-GMO

With the coming into effect of the DS-GVO, the legal basis for
changed the operation of video surveillance cameras. Since the DS-GVO does not contain a special regulation for video surveillance, the standard for one
Data protection-compliant video surveillance according to the general clause in Art. 6 para. 1
lit. f DS-GVO and according to § 4 BDSG.
115

Determining the location of a smartphone based on the range available
WiFi base stations
66

3.7 Video surveillance after the effective date of the DS-GVO

According to this, the processing of personal data (and thus video surveillance) is only permitted if it is necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the controller or third parties and if not the fundamental rights and
Fundamental freedoms of the data subject that require the protection of personal data. The DS-GVO requires a balancing in the concrete individual case both with regard to the interests of the responsible persons or third parties
also the person concerned. This formulation is essentially the same as the old one
Legal situation.
Much more concrete and detailed than the old regulation, however, are the
Transparency requirements.116 Article 13 of the GDPR contains a long list of mandatory information to be provided. These range from the
Contact details of the person responsible and, if applicable, the or the data protection officer about the interests, the purposes and the legal basis of the data processing up to the storage period and data subject rights. Because all of these
Information is impossible to find space on a conventional warning sign
here a graduated solution possible. While the most important information is on
The shield itself may belong to the farmandatory information at the place of
Video surveillance in a location accessible to the data subject (eg
at the reception, at the cash desk or at the reception).
Together with the other supervisory authorities of the federal states and the federal government, we have produced corresponding examples which have to be provided by the operators
Operators of video cameras can be used.117
In terms of content, citizens showed us especially video surveillance in
gastronomic facilities and in the private living environment. In these cases
However, it remains essentially in the old legal situation. In both areas is
a video surveillance usually inadmissible. In particular, video surveillance may in principle not extend beyond the boundaries of the property to neighboring properties or to public roads.118

116
117
118

Art. 12 et seq. DS-GVO
See https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/infothek-und-service/themen-a-bis-z/
video surveillance-to-the-ds-GMO
For exceptions and details see https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/infothek-und-service/themen-a-bis-z/videoueberwachung-nach-der-ds-gvo
67

Chapter 3

Interior

The video surveillance of the dining room is a gastronomic institution
according to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DS-GMO i. V. m. § 4 BDSG as a rule under data protection law
inadmissible. Again, little changes compared to the old legal situation. Gastronomy areas are customer areas that invite you to linger, relax and communicate longer and thus not monitored with video cameras
be allowed to. The behavior attributed to the leisure sector as a guest of one
gastronomic equipment goes with a particularly high protection of the
Personal rights of those affected. A video surveillance disturbs the undisturbed communication and the unobserved stay of the restaurant visitors and thus engages particularly intensely in the personality right of the guests. The worthy interest of the guests predominates
usually the legitimate interest of the traders in a surveillance, which is why their interest can prevail only in rare exceptional cases.
At the moment we are working together with our colleagues from the
intensified a common guideline for other European data protection authorities,
inform the person concerned about their rights and facilitate the compliance of operators with the legal requirements.
The requirements of the operation of a video surveillance device
have increased, especially in the area of ​​transparency obligations. Operators of CCTV cameras are
Therefore, they are asked to check whether their planned or existing monitoring equipment meets the increased requirements.

From practice

3.8

Video cameras at the Alexwache

The end of 2017 was devoted to the fight against crime and with the aim of
Alexanderplatz visible and approachable, the so-called Alexwache furnished. Shortly after the opening, a citizen informed us that he had noticed
that at the corners of the Alexwache 360-degree cameras are installed. At a
Look at the guard is also to see that the employees working there
Employees pan the cameras at will and view the pictures live on large
Monitors could watch.
68

3.8 video cameras at the Alexwache

In the test that we subsequently initiated, the police explained that the cameras covered only the building walls and a limited area next to each side of the building. The video surveillance was carried out to police task fulfillment, because the Alexwache was an endangered object, at
threatened with offenses directed against the police as such. The police
referred in this respect to various crimes against police departments and attacks
police vehicles and police officers in the recent past. On New Year's Eve, it had come to crackdown on the service building, moreover, had already urinated several times to the building and graffiti had been sprayed.
We informed the police that the Alexwache was not an endangered object in the sense
of the police law is. Religious sites, monuments, cemeteries and buildings, and other structures of public interest are in particular part of this term.119 The connecting feature of these examples is that the
Objects themselves are directly of public interest, either theirs
As such is of public interest or is founded on it,
that the object is used by the public.
At a police station is such a public interest in the building
not visible. In that regard, one can not rely on the performed there state tasks such as security and law enforcement, as this
a task description of the police that does not meet the criteria of immediacyand the particular interest in protecting the object. Otherwise, every building where state tasks are done would be an object
within the meaning of the police law, which overstep the scope of protection of the provision
would.
However, the police are aware of their home rights because of the reported incidents at the Alexwache regarding video surveillance
appointed. This is under strict conditions of every public office in Berlin
possible.120 In addition to concrete labeling and extinguishing obligations, in particular in the context of the proportionality test,
119
120

§ 24a General Security and Ordinance Act (ASOG)
§ 20 BlnDSG
69

Chapter 3

Interior

that the detection range of the cameras is limited to about one meter to the building facade.121
The police have meanwhile taken over our legal position and implemented the necessary measures. U. a. The shooting range of the cameras has been scaled down and notice boards affixed in an understandable way
clarify the detection range of the cameras.
It is important that the police, before carrying out video-surveillance measures, clarify their purpose and strictly separate possible authority rules. The standards have different requirements and correspondingly different degrees of difficulty
Impact on those affected.

121

See judgment of AG Berlin-Mitte of 18 December 2003, Az. 16 C 427/02
70

4.1 fahrCard - With photograph and full name?

4

Transport and tourism

4.1

fahrCard - With photograph and full name?

against the electronic ticket, the fahrCard. He complained on the one hand, that he in the course of conversion, a photograph
had to submit for mounting on the fahrCard, which was not necessary with the previous carrier card. On the other hand, he complained that inspectors at ticket inspections could not only see his full name, but also his date of birth.
The attachment of the photograph is permitted, as it is a personal, not
transferable season ticket. The BVG informed us that, on the one hand, from the VBB tariff regulations, personal electronic
On the other hand, the photograph is for an efficient control of the right to use the ticket
required. The photograph is thus for the performance of a contract between
required by the respective card holder and the BVG.123
However, according to our recommendation, the BVG adapted the storage of personal data on the fahrCard in such a way that in future only the
Year of birth124 and the initial letters of the first and last name125 are recorded so that the complete details for the control staff are not
are more visible.126
The BVG offered the petitioner to exchange his fahrCard free of charge.

122
123
124
125
126

Annex B to the VBB Tariff, point 5.2.5, subparagraph 6
Art. 6 para. 1 sentence 1 lit. b DS-GMO
As well as day and month always as "01.01."
Substituting the remaining letters with "*"
This complies with the recommended reduction rule in the VDV Core Application Standard,
on which also the fahrCard is based.
71

From practice

A petitioner turned to us, as his previous company ticket with carrier card

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

On electronic tickets, only such information may be stored
which are required to check the validity and the right of use. The date of birth and the full name are in this
usually not required.

From practice

4.2

Driving school: data transfer to one
interest group

A driving school had contacted us as it was already a few days after receipt
receive an advertising letter from an interest group
that congratulated the opening of the driving school and membership
campaigned. She expressed the presumption that the State Office of Civil and Regulatory Affairs (LABO) as the competent supervisory authority, the information to
could have passed on the interest group.
The LABO confirmed this assumption and said that the granting of an operating license for driving schools is not only due to legal obligations
z. B. the trade office and the Federal Motor Transport Authority will be notified, but
at whose request also said association. The notification to the association was issued on the basis of the Berlin Freedom of Information Act (IFG).
The notification of the issuing of the operating license to the association was
allowed. According to the IFG, anyone can provide information about the content of the
127 if none of the exclusion reasons apply there
In the present case, no personal data has been affected since it is
at the driving school is a legal person.129 But the samethe middle

127
128
129

Section 3 (1) IFG
Section 4 (1) IFG
According to Art. 4 No. 1 DS-GVO, personal data are only such information that
refer to an identified or identifiable natural person.
72

4.3 Obligation to order data protection officers at taxi companies

ment that a natural person has an operating permit for a driving school
was granted would have been permissible. Legitimate interests generally do not preclude the disclosure of personal data under the IFG, to the extent that it appears from a file that the data subjects are involved in an administrative or other procedure and by this information
with the exception of certain core data130 not other personal
Data will be revealed.131 The fact that a natural person succeeds
involved in an administrative procedure for obtaining an operating license
was, as a rule, may therefore be disclosed on application to the IFG together with the core data such as name and address.
Further exclusion reasons were not considered, so the passing on of the
Information was lawful.
The transfer of personal data always requires a legal basis. For this purpose, not only legal transmission obligations are considered, but also provisions according to the IFG.

4.3

Obligation to order data protection
contracted taxi companies

to appoint an operational data protection officer.
Responsible persons are obliged to appoint a data protection officer or a data protection officer, as long as they usually have at least ten persons constantly with the automated processing of personal data
It is irrelevant whether the processing of personal data

130

131
132

Name, title, academic degree, date of birth, occupation, branch or business name, internal function description, address and telephone number, § 6
Para. 2 sentence 1 no. 1 IFG
§ 6 para. 2 sentence 1 no. 1 lit. a IFG
Section 38 (1) BDSG in addition to Article 37 (1) lit. b and c DS-GMO
73

From practice

We received several requests from taxi companies to see if they were committed

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

The core activity is data, but regular automated processing suffices.
One of the taxi companies employed six people in the office
Employees who processed passengers' personal information, as well as 30
Taxi drivers and taxi drivers taking taxi rides. For the question of
Existence of an order was therefore to check whether the taxi drivers
and taxi drivers constantly with the automated processing of personal
Data were entrusted.
If the mediation of driving orders electronically, z. Eg by terminal,
via radio with appropriate function or via app on the smartphone, is
the acknowledgment and acceptance of orders as automated processing
personal data. At best, something else can be said
such orders, which are not electronic, but about conventional
Radio or in paper form. As taxi drivers
but in any case these days usually accept orders electronically as well
to assume a regular automated processing.
Taxi companies are therefore required to appoint one or more privacy officers if they employ a total of at least ten employees either processing personal data in the office or taking taxi rides after receiving an order electronically.
A data protection officer or a data protection officer is always then
to order if at least ten people are constantly using the automated
Processing of personal data. It does not have to be
To act as a core activity of these persons, rather already sufficient
regular processing.

74

4.4 Intelligent video surveillance in the Berlin-Südkreuz station

4.4

Intelligent video surveillance in the station
Berlin-Südkreuz

As part of the joint pilot project "Berlin Südkreuz safety station" by the Federal Ministry of the Interior, the Federal Police, the Federal Criminal Police Office and the Deutsche Bahn AG (DB AG) are since August 2017 systems
the so-called "intelligent" video surveillance tested. The project is divided into
two subprojects:
In the first pilot project, the Federal Police tested the use of biometric facial recognition systems.133 Prior to this, a database containing photographs of more than 200 volunteers participating in the project was created. The
Systems should first pick up the faces of passing passengers in specially marked interior areas of the station, with those previously mentioned
Synchronize database stored image data volunteers and ultimately filter out their faces at each detection and count. This first test
was in the Jucompleted in 2018. The in the final report of the Federal Police
By a combination of the three tested systems reached high hit rate stood thereby a very high false recognition rate, thus a large number
triggered false alarms, opposite. Every single one of these systems stood alone
even a much higher error rate.134 In their final report
As a result, the Federal Police will go from three to three for all three systems
four false hits per camera per hour off; at certain times of the day, the number of errors can be much higher.135 This means that
During the project about 80,000 to 100,000 times people wrongfully recorded
In spite of this, the Federal Police reported that the facial recognition

133
134
135

136

JB 2017, 3.6
See analysis of the Chaos Computer Club on 13.10.2018
P. 15 of the report Annex 3 - Analysis of the test data for subproject 1 "Biometric
Face recognition ", available at https://www.bundespolizei.de/Web/DE/04Aktuelles/01Meldungen/2018/10/181011_abschlussbericht_gesichtserkennung_down.
pdf? __ blob = publication file
This number is as follows: 365 days duration of the test x 24 hours per day x
three cameras x three to four false alarms.
75

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

State-of-the-art systems could be a good support tool for the police search.
We definitely see it differently. Unspoiled passers - by in
According to the available results, Südkreuz railway station regularly runs the risk of becoming the subject of biometric data processing without it
would have given an occasion for it. In a real operation would therefore be a high risk that a large number of citizens wrongly
subject to police investigation. Very questionable would be whether
The high error rate would not inevitably lead to a correct
Hits would not be recognized as such, because constantly too many false reports would have to be sorted out by hand. We warned of the problem last year.137 However, for the final legal assessment of the data processing of this first subproject by the Federal Police, the or
from 2019 the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
responsible.
In a second test scenario, the second quarter of 2019 is expected to be
Testing of so-called "intelligent" video analysis systems for the treatment and evaluation of various hazard scenarios. It should be helpless
Persons, large crowds and suspicious objects are automatically detected and reported by the data processing systems.
For this purpose, it is planned to simulate concrete test scenarios in the station area with the help of five to ten volunteers. As the parking of a piece of luggage and the tracking of the person who has parked this bag.
Deutsche Bahn is very useful for carrying out the second test scenario
and responsible for data protection and thus we as responsible data protection supervisory authority for Deutsche Bahn. As such, we urgently
advised to refrain from biometric data processing. Because due
the fact that a biometric characteristic usually does not change throughout life, such data processing involves considerable
Security risks. A survey of biometric data is not just for the
Face recognition before, but also with other data to physical, phy137

JB 2017, 3.6
76

4.5 Connected and Automated Driving

siologischen or behavior typical characteristics, such. B. the individual
A person's gait.138 In the event of loss of data, those affected can live
long victim of identity theft and subsequent crime. The assessment
biometric data is therefore always associated with a very deep invasion of privacy and a considerable risk. Consequently, that is
Processing of biometric data by non-public authorities after the
General Data Protection Regulation prohibited in principle and only permissible in exceptional cases.139
Deutsche Bahn has declared its willingness to forego the collection of biometric data during the test. We closely oversee the project to ensure
that this requirement and other data protection regulations are complied with
become.
The processing of biometric data entails considerable risks.
Therefore, this should be extremely economical and only then by security agencies
be used if it is not prone to error and, after weighing up all aspects, provide measurable added value for the security of citizens
Citizens clearly outweighs the restrictions on the right to informational self-determination. Non-public authorities are generally concerned with the processing of biometric data for the purpose of unambiguous identification of persons
banand only allowed in very exceptional cases.

4.5

Connected and automated driving -
What are the privacy risks?
the new techniques?

Electromobility in particular is networked and autonomous driving
important future fields. But the improvements for traffic safety and
the increased comfort for the users of the vehicles can be protected by data protection law138
139

Art. 4 No. 14 DS-GVO
Art. 9 DS-GVO
77

From practice

Technical progress is also very evident in the automotive sector. Ne

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

risks, as the technical tools also
capture the driver or vehicle occupants. Negative effects would be
z. B. the creation of movement, behavior or use profiles.
In the automotive sector, potential data protection risks have increased significantly in recent years, in parallel with technical progress.
This already begins with car rental companies, who nowadays mostly monitor their vehicles permanently for theft avoidance via GPS. This also applies to assistance systems which also retrieve numerous personal data from the vehicle to ensure the corresponding driving safety functions
and evaluate. Another example is modern vehicles already today
are able to exchange data in real time with each other and even drive fully automatically in the future.
Many of these modern techniques serve to increase traffic safety,
faster information for rescue workers and improved comfort
for the users and are thus basically welcome. However, it is important that the data processing processes are transparent for those affected, so that the vehicle owners and the drivers
and drivers can actively decide which surveys and processing of personal data they agree with. Likewise, consent given in the past - eg. B. to survey the vehicle location - too
can be specifically withdrawn again. Technical solutions that only allow for the full consent in all data processing
or completely opting out of smart mobility services
unacceptable. These requirements are also enshrined in law by the DS-GVO, which has been in force since May 25, 2018, because according to the principles formulated in it, "Privacy by Design" and "Privacy by Default", technical systems and technologies are
the default settings of the devices as privacy-friendly as the state
In addition, suitable technical and organizational measures have to be taken to ensure that it is appropriate to the respective risk
Ensure the level of security for the security of data processing.141

140
141

Art. 25 DS-GVO
Art. 32 DS-BER
78

4.5 Connected and Automated Driving

This is even more important as large amounts of data are processed for the automated and networked driving functions. So can in a modern
networked vehicle z. For example, not only the speed at which the vehicle is moving and how many people are in the vehicle are recorded.
Also, many other information can be detected, eg. B. whether the driver
already fatigue symptoms shows how his acceleration behavior
represents or which seat and comfort settings the vehicle occupants each have chosen. Or also which routes were last driven
how big the distance to other vehicles is, in what condition the tires
or whether the vehicle is traveling on dry or slippery roads. This
These are just a few examples of a large number of generated data, which is permanently generated by control units or sensors in the interior and exterior of the vehicles
be captured, stored and processed. Part of this data is going right after
Survey and evaluation discarded again, but much data is quite
also stored in the longer term (eg last traveled routes, personal settings of the various users of a vehicle, use of navigation and media services, diagnostic data of the vehicle, etc.).
Of particular importance in this context is location and position data. These are not only processed by various navigation and comfort services in the vehicle, but u. a. also through the emergency call system "eCall", which has been mandatory in Europe since October 2015 for all new models
of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles. In an accident will
the vehicle is automatically located and the local emergency response center can
Communicate to the driver via a mobile radio unit. The radio unit is here
each equipped with its own SIM card, which is permanently installed in the car. Of the
eCall emergency call in its basic function is subject to strict regulations for data protection, possible additional services by third parties(eg vehicle manufacturers), however, are not covered by this. Thus, there is the risk of unauthorized retrieval of data about the vehicle or the driving behavior of the
Users in particular by private data processors, their services in modern day
Vehicle systems are embedded.
Networked and automated vehicles also use a large number of other sensors to permanently monitor their own position compared to other vehicles.

79

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

to ensure both the prevention and prevention of accidents and to ensure optimal route planning.
Building on this, the automotive industry is already planning cooperative systems
for cars and trucks, enabling vehicles and even transport infrastructure to communicate with each other on their own. This allows z. Eg early congestion warnings and the calculation
suitable alternative routes through the respective navigation system. On-board systems
warn of possible dangers on the track or seek the on request
next free parking. Lorries could automatically drive in a network in columns to save fuel and environmentally friendly to reach their destination.
First test inserts of this so-called Car-to-X communication already exist and should be
will certainly be gradually expanded in the next few years. This is possible u. a. also by building the next generation of clearly
more powerful mobile networks, the so-called 5G networks142. The significantly faster data rates in the mobile Internet allow the networking of vehicles
and transport infrastructure, but at the same time also produce higher risks
through the transfer of personally identifiable information to the mobile device
(eg number of the SIM card used, IMEI number of the mobile device)
or by information about the vehicle (eg ID of the networked vehicle, registration number, vehicle identification number). From the obtained data u. a.
Create movement and usage profiles. The frequency of use of a vehicle and the number of different drivers could be derived from it
determine if necessary.
Building on the scenarios already described have become synonymous
developed further uses in other lines of business that need to be closely considered. For example, the insurance industry offers For example, for some years now an increasing number of optional telematics tariffs143 have been introduced
Recording and analysis of all routes and numerous details (eg frequency of journeys, average journey length and duration, time of journeys,
selected goals, driving style etc.) extensive conclusions on the respective Fahr142
143

5G stands for "5. Generation "of mobile networks.
These are often referred to in English as "pay as you drive" rates.
80

4.5 Connected and Automated Driving

allow the behavior of customers. Policyholders who voluntarily agree to the necessary data recording, in return
a discount on their individual insurance contribution in view. Of the
European Association of Insurers has also expressed an interest in
that its member companies may also have access to the eCall data in the future
receive their customers in order to be able to adjust insurance rates even more precisely.
Basically, new techniques to increase traffic safety and
certainly welcome the speeding up of the provision of accident victims and improving the flow of traffic. Nevertheless, with all the advantages, too
the risks of the new technologies are not ignored. Nearly
every technology also carries corresponding dangers of data misuse. So bows
Although the permanent location of a vehicle may be theft,
but also allows the creation of motion profiles. When charging
of electric cars is for billing purposes regularly also at least
a personal ID of the customer by the respective one
Provider to be able to allocate the charging process during billing.
Telematics services, in turn, usually need a lot of data from vehicles
collect for the technology to work effectively. This is often accompanied automatically by a technical monitoring of the drivers. Regarding
The networked and automated vehicles of the future will be the automotive industry and its related industries (eg suppliers and suppliers)
Insurance companies) as well as policy makers and administrators are called upon to bring technical progress and data protection in a reasonable way.
To improve road safety and enhance customer comfort, many of the new technologies in the automotive sector are welcome. However, here should always be between the expected
Benefits to be weighed by technology and potential risks to privacy. NIn particular, data security and data protection are also the providers' transparency towards their customers
Important to them, so they are always fully informed about which
Data may be collected and for what period of time they are stored and
which places have access to the data. The described technologies

81

Chapter 4

Transport and tourism

will be used in future in Berlin and possibly by Berlin
Provider will be further developed. We will therefore continue the development
watch carefully.

82

5.1 Adaptation of the Berlin Education Act to the DS-GVO - Good at the end, all right?

5

Youth and education

5.1

Adaptation of the Berlin Education Act to the
DS-GVO - end good, all right?

the Berlin Education Act to the DS-GVO. This process went
not smoothly from the beginning.
Although the DS-GVO has direct effect in all member states of the European Union, it contains in many places the so-called opening clauses
also freedom of action for national legislators. At the same time they are
Member States demanded that all national regulations providing for a regulation
The processing of personal data have to be examined for their compatibility with European law. An appropriate one
Examination was thus also the Berlin School Act, which provides the relevant data processing powers for schools, school authorities, school inspectorate
etc. to undergo.
The draft bill, which was presented to us in March 2018, still did not adequately implement the data protection requirements. In particular contained
the draft does not comply with the regulations of the DS-GVO
Processing of special categories of personal data. Which includes
z. B. Health data of the students or information about their religious or ideological convictions. Furthermore, z. B. Processing powers for parents' representatives, who are also in the school routine with the
Processing of personal data.
Unfortunately, the Senate Department did not continue to involve us in the revision process in the following years. In the summer of 2018, we learned from a press release that a new draft had already been submitted to the Senate
was. In it, the Senate Administration had our criticisms in essential points

83

From practice

We have the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family at the Adaptation

Chapter 5

Youth and education

not picked up. We have once again made clear our criticisms of the Senate Administration. We could finally reach
that some regulations were adapted in accordance with data protection. The school law
now contains z. B. clear rules on the processing of specific categories of personal data.
So all's well, all right? - Not quite.
For even the law that has now been passed continues to contain one
very problematic scheme. Thus, the school law founded henceforth u. a. a
Authority for the school inspectorate to retain the data of pupils under certain conditions after leaving school
process them to B. in vocational training.144 That's it
Therefore, not sustainable, because it concerns the affected persons regularly
are those who are not going to school anymore and therefore not
more subject to the regulations of the school law. Of course, the school should
about the preparation of pupils for working life
To take care of. This would have to happen during school time, not afterwards. It
is not one of the statutory duties of the school inspectorate, such
Organize measures for former students, no matter if
have this need or not, because they are z. B. no longer living in Berlin or
have long since been professionally oriented. Such a measure can therefore
only as an additional service for voluntary acceptance.
A storage of personal data alumni can accordingly
only on a voluntary basis, namely when the persons concerned
Want to accept offer as useful for itself. The legislator should therefore reconsider its decision once again and at the next amendment of the
Improve school law at this point.
With the adaptation of the school law to the DS-GVO a major challenge has been mastered - although not in every respect satisfactory.
Now it is also the school data regulation, which is currently also revised
is to bring it up to date and give it speed.

144

Section 64 (7) in the version of the school act entered into force on 1 January 2019
84

5.2 Implementation of the DS-GVO in child and youth welfare

5.2

Implementation of the DS-GVO in the child and
youth Services

legally organized free Tchild and youth welfare organizations to apply the provisions of the DS-GVO. In practice, there is a high need for information with regard to the changed legal situation.
We have numerous requests for participation in information events
reached. Not all requests for lectures could be fulfilled due to our limited capacities. We focused as much as possible
to reach many multipliers. With the social pedagogical advanced training institute Berlin Brandenburg (SFBB), which for the further education
In June 2018, we have a specialist event on the DS-GVO, which is responsible for the educational specialists in the child and youth welfare services of both states
attended by over 100 pedagogical professionals.145
The aim was to give the participants an initial overview of the effects
the new European data protection law on the practice of child and youth welfare and to illuminate the relationship with the provisions of social data protection law. Due to the high response to the event will be
There will be an in-depth symposium in the spring of 2019, at which we will be active again
involved.
In the child and youth welfare are also after the coming into force of the DS-GVO
- as before - the sector-specific provisions of the social code146
apply. While the federal legislature the regulations of the SGB I and
SGB ​​X has adjusted before the DS-GVO became effective, is one such
Adaptation for the child and youth welfare authority
SGB ​​VIII still out. For professionals, the challenge is the practice
in applying the different regulations side by side.
145
146

The conference documentation can be downloaded from the SFBB website,
https://sfbb.berlin-brandenburg.de/sixcms/detail.php/873533/
Social Code - First Book - General Part (SGB I), Social Code - Eighth
Book - Child and Youth Services (SGB VIII) and Social Code - Tenth Book -
Social administrative procedures and social data protection (SGB X)
85

From practice

Since 25 May 2018, youth welfare offices and the numerous private

Chapter 5

Youth and education

With the DS-GVO arise in dealing with social data in the granting of
Benefits of child and youth welfare (eg assistance for education, but also
in dealing with child endangerment) no serious changes, since
the preconditions for the admissibility of data processing in the context of
Opening clauses for the national law continue to result from the social data protection regulations.
Innovations arise but z. B. in the also in the child and youth welfare
information obligations to be respected or the extended data subjects' rights
according to the DS-GVO.147 we were here on perfectly traceable practical
Problems made aware: Especially with telephone consultations (eg in
Crisis situations) or in the counseling of adolescents in precarious situations for which the inhibition threshold to accept counseling is high anyway
there is a risk that written information declarations may miss their target and be more of a deterrent. Here it is important to find workable solutions. These must be first and foremost in the interests of the persons concerned
his. Since transparency and the establishment of a relationship of trust in helping contexts are in any case of particular importance, we consider it entirely appropriate to fulfill the obligations to provide information also in the framework of explanatory
To comply with discussions with appropriate documentation.
The implications for the practice of the DS-GVO are currently in
Particular attention to areas where sensitive data is processed. For us it is a concern, the child and youth welfare here
to support.

147

Art. 13 ff. DS-GVO
86

5.3 Uniform Special Procedures in the Berlin Youth Welfare - Status Report

5.3

Uniform technical procedure in the Berlin
Youth welfare - progress report

Again this year new modules of the cross-administrative are
Specialized procedure ISBJ-Jugendhilfe (SoPart), which is used as a central specialized procedure in all twelve Berlin youth welfare offices148, has been taken over by the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family.
For many years, we have supported the cross-administrative project Integrated Software Berlin Youth Relief (ISBJ). The currently introduced central IT solution for all district youth welfare offices had to be adapted to the changes introduced by the DS-GVO this year. For example, a privacy policy was to
to meet the information requirements149 for the data subjects. We have the lead role in introducing the specialized procedure
Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family in the preparation of a declaration made available to the districts in time for May 25, 2018
data schulegally advised. This will certainly be evaluated after some time due to the first practical experience with the DS-GVO
have to. In addition to the privacy policy were some technical processes to
Guarantee of data subject rights ("information at the push of a button") to be implemented in the specialized procedure and directories for the processing activity150
to create. For the new modules, the new instrument of the
Data Protection Impact Assessment151 applied.
This year, the new module Jugendberufshilfe for the professionals of the district youth welfare offices active in the youth employment agencies was put into operation. The access possibilities of the Jugendberufshilfe within
of the specialized procedure on the juvenile welfare data in the other organizational units of the youth welfare office we have with the youth department of the senate administration

148
149
150
151

JB 2016, 5.4; JB 2017, 2.3
Art. 13 ff. DS-GVO
Art. 30 DS-GVO
Art. 35 DS-GVO
87

Chapter 5

Youth and education

tuned for education, youth and family. The specialized procedure ensures that access can only be made to the required data.
Finally, we have a clarifying provision in the Youth Affairs Department of the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family
from
Guidelines on the Child and Youth Welfare Act (AG KJHG) with the
data protection legislation, which the Senate Administration has forwarded to the Senate Department for Home Affairs and Sport, which is responsible for the adaptation of state law to the DS-GVO.152
Also in this year the votes were made with the youth administration
uncomplicated and constructive. The requirements of the DS-BER were - in contrast to most other areas of administration - timely to
May 25, 2018 implemented. It is important to us, the implementation of the DSGVO standardized specifications for data protection through technology design
to assist in the ISBJ specialist procedure in the future as a positive advisor
Example for the implementation of data protection requirements.

From practice

5.4

Privacy in Kitas - How good will the
Data protected by our youngest?

The fact that child day care centers handle the data of the children entrusted to them in accordance with data protection is of particular concern to the parents. But also in
In many cases, the day care centers themselves are insecure, as with the
To handle the data of children and their families.
Especially in connection with the coming into effect of the DS-GVO, the uncertainty in the facilities for the privacy-sensitive handling of personal data has increased again. The handling of photos, the drafting of declarations of consent, as well as the use of new technologies
such as For example, apps that electronically record delivery and pickup times for children
or the parents information from everyday life be made available
152

For the adaptation of the national law see JB 2018, 1.8
88

5.4 Privacy in Kitas - How well are the data of our youngest protected?

repeatedly leads to privacy issues with parents,
but also at the facilities. Both counseling requests and complaints in this area often relate precisely to these topics.
In the context of complaints, it is our concern to achieve privacy-friendly procedures for the future. However, it is within our capacity z. B. often not possible, consent statements abstract
to verify that they comply with data protection legislation. The most common questions we get about dealing with photo and
Video footage of children in daycare. The guideline "Privacy
in image, video and sound recordings - What is in the daycare to
Consider? "153, which we published at the beginning of the year together with the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family154, has in practice
found great response, even beyond the state of Berlin. Our concern was
to give pedagogical specialists a practical overview of the complex legal situation with the action guide. We have in
Interest of intelligibility deliberately largely waived, concrete
Citing rules and laws. Since the strict requirements on the effectiveness of declarations of consent also before the coming into effect of the DS-GVO in the
content of the text of the guideline also meets the requirements of the DS-GVO. However, as we are increasingly asked to explain to what extent the booklet the legal situation
even after the DS-GVO became effective, we decided to
to create a supplementary information sheet. In this the relevant articles of the DS-GMO are specifically named. With the next edition we will
then incorporate the relevant rules into the text.
DThe feedback on the action guideline shows that it offers the institutions assistance in providing more legal security in dealing with data protection issues in day-to-day care. We plan to expand the range of information for day care centers in the future.

153

154

The action guide is available at https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/file
admin / user_upload / pdf / publications / information materials / 2018 BlnBDI_Flyer_
Datenschutz_Inhalt_Web.pdf.
JB 2014, 4.1; JB 2015, 6.4; JB 2017, 6.5
89

Chapter 5

From practice

5.5

Youth and education

Data protection and media literacy -
Children's website www.data-kids.de online

The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information has committed himself to
Aimed to raise awareness among children as early as possible for their protection
To wake up data. Since 2016, we have been working on age-appropriate materials to educate children, already at primary school age, on how to exercise their right to informational self-determination and
how they should behave in particular on the net.155
In terms of developmental psychology, children from the age of seven are capable of doing so
estimate longer-term consequences. It can be assumed that
Children from the 3rd grade can develop an awareness of privacy issues. The sooner we accompany them, the more media-adept and thus responsible and responsible they can participate in social life, making use of their right to informational self-determination
and competencies for the digital world.
We started in the spring of 2018 with our children's website www.data-kids.de
Offer where children can get to know the most important terms about privacy. A robotic family accompanies them through the world of data protection and explains what happens with the right to informational self-determination
has. In first materials for teachers we explain what cookies and that
Are right to their own image and how the children can protect their own data.
In order for the children to identify with the robots, we called for a contest in which elementary school children made names for the robotic children
should consider. The then class 3b won the elementary school on
Tegel's place.156
After we have created the basic structures and main contents of the website
and the characters had developed, we put ours in the second half of the year
155
156

JB 2017, 6.6
See also 14.5
90

5.6 Elterngeld Digital - An innovative project?

Website, also using feedback from primary schools.
In the coming year, we will continue to optimize the children's offer to the
To reach the target group even better. Specifically, we will examine the existing materials in child-friendly language and, where necessary, adapt. We will make the elements of the website interactive and playful, but in any case graphically even more appealing.
Our goal is to expand the website into a comprehensive offer,
with the teachers, parents and children their data protection competence effectively
can strengthen.

5.6

Elterngeld Digital - An innovative project?

Involved by the Federal Ministry for Family, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth initiated project "Elterngeld Digital". Applicants should be allowed to
Submit applications for payment of parental allowance digitally via an internet portal provided by the Federal Ministry.
The aim of the project "Elterngeld Digital" is the digital processing of the grant
of parental allowance to the benefit recipients. As the federal parents money though
is a service of the Federation, the settlement, however, by the parental benefit
countries, they are responsible for deciding on the applications.
The Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family has agreed to
to participate in the federal pilot project. With regard to the question of the lawfulness of the processing of social data by the state of Berlin, we too are
involved in the project.
While everything was well prepared on the Berlin side, the project was run by the
Federal rather sluggish. With a one-year delay, the project became
In the autumn of 2018 we started with the so-called application assistant. Parents can
However, they must complete their applications online with the help of the assistant
continue to send by mail to their competent parental benefit agency. A complete91

From practice

Already in 2017, the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family sent us to the

Chapter 5

Youth and education

The current digitization of the application is still failing due to the fact that a
Legal basis in the Federal Law on Parental Leave and Parental Leave Law (BEEG) is missing.157 Das
Federal Ministry for Family is data protection law responsible for the
In the context of the application in the Internet portal accruing social data and requires a legal basis for the processing. Because the survey
