PRESS RELEASE

February 26, 2019

School lessons of a different kind or privacy advocates conquer the schools
or privacy advocates and students teach and learn together

School hours of a different kind were offered in February 2019 by the employees of the data protection supervisory authorities in various federal states.
This is not an editorial oversight, in fact, as part of a joint transnational action and
in cooperation with the Professional Association of Data Protection Officers in Germany
(BvD) e.V. students familiar with the topic of data protection
made.
With effect from the European data protection basic regulation (DS-GVO) on 25.
May 2018, Article 57 (1) lit. b DS-GVO a legal order, the
all data protection supervisory authorities throughout Europe.
This is the first time that the obligation to protect the rights of children has become one
Europe-wide legal basis for data protection explicitly laid down.
Regardless of this legal requirement and this novelty in the legal landscape, the protection of children and adolescents can not be set high enough, since they are the most vulnerable in our society. Data protection does not only mean protection of personal freedom, but also, in particular, child and youth protection, according to the State Commissioner for Data Protection of Baden-Württemberg, Dr. med. Stefan Brink. As a father, he is the child and
Protection of minors is a big concern. He pays special attention to
not to ban, but to make the children and adolescents strong so they can
Recognize risks and thus be able to act consciously and to decide consciously and well informed.
Just in time for the Safer Internet Day, the initiative "Privacy goes to school"
The BvD thus vigorously supported by the supervisory authorities in Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Lower Saxony and Rhineland-Palatinate.
Especially entertaining and above all vividly, the abstract topic "data protection" is transported through the numerous short video clips contained in the lecture.
Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

As part of the events, the students questioned, for example, the limits of Big
Data, Smart Home and also the use and data transfer when using
Messenger services at the price of giving private information and data critical.
Comfort versus privacy quickly became a big issue.
It became clear that free offers have to be scrutinized. is
Free messenger service offered for free? From which
Reason many companies offer loyalty cards and associated discounts and
Loyalty bonuses?
It quickly became clear that today no company has something to give away.
Surprisingly clear to the lecturers that the "data octopus" Facebook has almost no meaning in this age group - use Facebook
just the adults, so my parents or my grandparents. And who wants to
a friend request from his aunt - so the feedback from the students
Student.
The enthusiastic feedback from the young people, the teachers, the
School principals, the lecturers of the respective supervisory authorities as well as the press coverage in the regional daily newspapers have made it clear how important and sensible it is for children and adolescents to deal with them
to raise awareness of their personal data on the Internet and what a challenge it is to explain this topic with a vocabulary appropriate to the target group.
Specifically, in Baden-Württemberg alone a total of approx. 600 pupils in Stuttgart, Esslingen, Ditzingen, Walldorf, Bad Friedrichshall, Ludwigsburg,
Ettlingen, Lorch and Pforzheim achieved with the joint and transnational action of the supervisory authorities in cooperation with the BvD.
However, it also became clear that the need for schools is much, much higher than
we could satisfy with our action.
Conclusion of our transnational action:
We will continue!
For more information, see:
https://www.bvdnet.de/datenschutz-geht-zur-schule/
For teachers who themselves treat aspects of data protection in the classroom or
Since November 2018, the 3rd revised edition of the teacher's handbook "Data Protection Goes to School" has been used to prepare and follow up the units. The materials can be downloaded for free
