The President of the Republic of Slovenia, Borut Pahor, today visited the seat of the Information Commissioner as the first President of the Republic. Information Commissioner Mojca Prelesnik thanked President Pahor for his visit and briefly outlined the two areas of activity of the Information Commissioner: protection of personal data and access to public information. She assessed that the work of the body so far and the public&#39;s confidence in their work justifies the mission of the Information Commissioner. This is illustrated, inter alia, by the fact that the number of applications is constantly increasing in both areas. In her conversation, the Information Commissioner pointed out that Slovenia has not yet aligned its Personal Data Protection Act with the General Regulation on Personal Data Protection. Procedures in this area are managed by the Information Commissioner in accordance with the general regulation, but the inconsistency of the legal framework also affects the successful work of the Information Commissioner. President Pahor expressed his understanding and supported the further efforts of the Information Commissioner to prepare as soon as possible the necessary amendments to the legislation in the field of personal data protection. The President of the Republic particularly emphasized his commitment to maximize transparency of all procedures within his competence, especially when nominating holders of the highest state functions. He strongly believed that the public&#39;s interest in being informed of the nominations and procedures was more important than possibly protecting the personal data of individual candidates. In this context, the Information Commissioner welcomed the work and efforts of the President in advocating transparency while respecting all legal provisions. The Information Commissioner finally emphasized that they will continue to actively strive to maintain the public sector&#39;s hard-to-reach level of transparency, and presented the President with the challenges posed by new regulations and new technologies in the field of personal data protection. In both areas, both in protecting the right of access to public information and the right to the protection of personal data, their main focus will be on the effective protection and protection of the rights of individuals, in collaboration with taxpayers and the profession, she added.