
YouSee A / S '(TDC A / S') processing of personal data
Published 28-03-2019
Decision
Private companies
The Danish Data Protection Agency expresses serious criticism that TDC, among other things, has not continuously erased personal data in their temporary database after the implementation of a specific marketing campaign.Journal number: 2018-431-0017
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has handled a case of its own doing, where YouSee A / S (hereafter TDC) has sent e-mails to a number of citizens with marketing material. In connection with the preparation of a marketing campaign, TDC erroneously sent e-mails to a number of customers, former customers and others who at one point had consented to receive marketing material on the basis of their temporary database. email.
On 28 March 2019, the Data Inspectorate decided that TDC's processing of personal data in the situation in question was contrary to Articles 5 (1) (e) and 6 (6) of the Data Protection Regulation. Paragraph 1 (a), which the Danish Data Protection Agency has made serious criticism of.
It was the Data Inspectorate's assessment that TDC did not continuously delete personal data in their temporary database after the implementation of a specific marketing campaign, and that the company has therefore stored personal data for a longer period than was necessary for the purpose for which the information was processed. , just as TDC did not demonstrate that the processing of the personal data in question was based on the consent of the data subjects.
Decision
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case where, in mid-November 2018, YouSee A / S (hereafter TDC) sent e-mails to a number of citizens on the topic "It's new and it's better!".
It should be noted at the outset that the Danish Data Protection Agency can only decide on matters covered by the Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act. Accordingly, the Danish Data Protection Agency has not, with this decision, taken a position on the issue of consent to direct marketing, as it falls within the competence of the Consumer Ombudsman.
1. Decision
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is reason to express serious criticism that TDC's processing of personal data did not comply with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation [1]. 1 and Article 6 (1). 1, point a.
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
In mid-November 2018, the Data Inspectorate received a number of inquiries from citizens who had received emails from TDC for marketing purposes.
In response to the Data Protection Authority's request of November 29, 2018, TDC issued a statement on December 20, 2018:
“In connection with the preparation of a marketing campaign, YouSee has inadvertently sent e-mails to a number of customers, former customers and others who at some point have consented to receive marketing material per. email.
The e-mail sent was intended as an internal test that should be sent to quite a few employees of YouSee. In the event of a human error, the email was sent to the wrong ones.
The email was entitled "Are you ready for an even better connection?" And then contained an unfinished description of a broadband product: "Get the future connection to DKK 0 in the first month [not specified] Mbit - completely without binding [not specified] ./md. Minimum price DKK [not specified]… ”
When YouSee sends out emails as part of a marketing campaign, an IT system (Silverpop) is used. The IT system retrieves email addresses and content for the email from a temporary database.
Before the broadcast, the temporary database is filled with emails from another IT system (Unica), which has access to YouSee's customer database.
Once the emails in question have been sent, the contents of the temporary database can be deleted.
By mistake, the contents of the temporary database have not been permanently deleted. This has resulted in not only emails being sent to current customers, but also to people who no longer have a customer relationship with YouSee and people who may have withdrawn their consent.
YouSee has erased the temporary database after the erroneous sending of emails and ensured that the contents of the temporary database will be permanently deleted in the future. Thus, the contents of the temporary database are now deleted every seven days. "
In addition, TDC has provided the following:
"The temporary database contains information on the following categories of persons:

customers
Former customers
Persons who have consented to receive promotional material per email

The temporary database contains the following categories of personal data:

Email address
Other information related to a customer relationship (varies from campaign to campaign, but may include customer number and phone number)

The content of the temporary database constituted a selection of YouTube's customer database. The temporary database IT system was established on May 22, 2016, and the database may therefore have contained personal data back to that date.
The content of the temporary database is processed solely for the purpose of posting marketing material in a specific campaign. The retention of personal data in the temporary database is based on Article 6 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (a) (consent).
The retention of e-mails in the temporary database until the sending of e-mails in a specific campaign has been in accordance with the basic principles of Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation. The accidental retention of e-mails in the temporary database in the period following the implementation of a specific campaign campaign, on the other hand, cannot be based on Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e). "
3. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
The Data Inspectorate has assumed that since the establishment of the temporary database in question, TDC has not continuously erased personal data that has been processed in connection with the distribution of marketing material since May 22, 2016.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has assumed that the processing of ordinary, non-sensitive information has been covered by Article 6 of the Data Protection Regulation.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate has assumed that an error occurred in the processing of personal data during the preparation of a marketing campaign, in which a number of e-mails were sent in draft form to the data subjects.
The Data Inspectorate finds that TDC's processing of personal data in the situation in question has been contrary to Articles 5 (1) (e) and 6 (6) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, point a.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate emphasized in particular what TDC stated, including that TDC did not continuously delete personal data in the temporary database after the implementation of a specific marketing campaign, and that the company has therefore stored personal data for a longer period than was necessary. for the purpose for which the information was processed.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that TDC has not shown that processing, including storage, of the personal data in question was based on the consent of the data subjects.
Thus, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is a basis for expressing serious criticism that TDC's processing of personal data did not comply with the Data Protection Regulation.
The Data Inspectorate has noted that TDC has deleted the temporary database and ensured that the content will be continuously deleted every seven days.
[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
