Operator of Facebook fanpages
bear data protection responsibility!
The European Court of Justice upholds the opinion of German data protection supervisory authorities: operators of Facebook fan pages can
responsible for data processing by Facebook (with)

Press release - page 1/4
Munich, 05.06.2018
The Court of Justice of the European Union (ECJ) ruled today
confirmed that the operator of a Facebook fan page - in addition to Facebook
- is responsible under data protection law that Facebook data of the
Fanpage visitor collects visitor statistics.
The starting point of the decision is a pending administrative law dispute between the Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig-Holstein since 2011
GmbH and the Independent Center for Privacy Protection Schleswig-Holstein (ULD). The company took the view that it could
run a Facebook fan page without having to worry about it
whether Facebook complies with data protection law. The ECJ now clarified
that this view is incompatible with European data protection law
is: "The fact that an operator of a fan page that of Facebook
set up platform uses the related services in
To be able to claim this can not be achieved by observing its
Obligations in the field of the protection of personal data. "(Paragraph 40 of the judgment)
Data protection law is responsible to anyone over the purposes and means
processing of personal data. The ECJ has
stated that the concept of the controller is broad,
effective and comprehensive protection of data subjects
to ensure. The operator of a Facebook fan page is involved
the decision on the purposes and means of processing peopleYour personality right - our mission

Press release dated 05.06.2018 - page 2/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

related data of the visitors of his fan page. He
designs its own information and communication offer and contributes
thus with the processing of the personal data of the visitors of his fan page. Since Facebook also determines the purposes and means of processing, Facebook and FacebookFanpages operators share the responsibility for data protection.
The ECJ states that a fan page operator is not just a Facebook user, but, as the responsible person, gives Facebook the opportunity to
through the operation of the fan page to set cookies and especially with
Help of filters provided by Facebook the criteria
set statistics to use to generate statistics. For the accountability is not crucial that an access to the concerned
personal data.
The ECJ also confirms that the ULD was allowed to direct supervisory measures against the operator of a Facebook fan page based in Schleswig-Holstein. Alone the opportunity, regulatory
Acting on Facebook does not exclude measures against the co-responsible provider of a Facebook fan page.
The State Commissioner for Data Protection Schleswig-Holstein Marit Hansen
welcomes the judgment of the European Court of Justice: "The decision has my assessment
confirms that there are no gaps in data privacy
can. In concrete terms, this now means for all fan page operators that they have to clarify between them and Facebook, which data protection obligations they themselves have to fulfill and for which Facebook is responsible.
This applies in particular to the information requirements: without transparency,
like the data about all users - d. H. Members and non-members
from Facebook - are processed, this does not work. In the persons concerned, z. B. the right to information or rectification, the following applies:
Everyone can have these rights both to the fanpage operator as well
directly against Facebook. "
Hansen considers it necessary that questions about the General Data Protection Regulation
In the future, the ECJ will be presented earlier: "For legal certainty
a quick legal clarification essential. Judicial proceedings too

Press release dated 05.06.2018 - Page 3/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

such policy issues are in the fast lane. I am of it
convinced that some cases of data abuse - I recall
Cambridge Analytica - could have been prevented if already
In 2011, all German or even European Fanpage operators would have requested the data protection compliance for their offers. "
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection Thomas Petri
recommends that the Bavarian public authorities use their judgment
To critically examine public relations at providers of social media.
Petri: "The European Court of Justice has made it very clear
that the operator of a fan page does not thereby by the observance of his
data protection Pflis free to use the platform provided by another provider. Data processing by Facebook and other social media are already numerous throughout Europe
Complaints to data protection supervisory authorities received. in view of
experience so far it would not be surprising in the result
Facebook data also on the scale of the General Data Protection Regulation
unlawfully processed. Either social media have to contact the in
Europe, or they can not
co-responsible use. In any case, potential benefits of public relations do not justify data breaches. "

Marit Hansen

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

Press release dated 05.06.2018 - page 4/4
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

If you have any questions, please contact:
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection
Wagmüllerstraße 18, 80538 Munich
Tel: 089 212672-0, Fax: -50
E-Mail: poststelle@datenschutz-bayern.de
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de
The State Commissioner for Data Protection Schleswig-Holstein
Independent Center for Privacy Schleswig-Holstein
Holstenstr. 98, 24103 Kiel
Tel: 0431 988-1200, Fax: -1223
E-Mail: mail@datenschutzzentrum.de
https://www.datenschutzzentrum.de/

The State Commissioner for Data Protection Schleswig-Holstein is also the head of the Independent Center for Data Protection (ULD) and for the data protection of
Authorities, companies and associations in Schleswig-Holstein.
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities.
The two state representatives are elected by their respective state parliament, independently and
not bound by any instructions.
