01.10.2018New data protection law: Data protection violations are notifiable! | 07/2018

The General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO), which has been applicable since 25 May 2018, provides for a significant tightening of the obligation to inform the supervisory authority in the event of a breach of data protection. As expected, the number of reports of such "data breaches" has increased massively since this deadline: While the country representative was only notified six times between January and May, she has already received 60 reports in the past four months. In this way, we value the fact that data protection is becoming more aware of those responsible in companies, authorities and associations.
For example, a day-care center reported the theft of their digital camera with the photos of the children, a clinic accidentally handed over the copy of a severely handicapped ID card to the wrong patient and some bank customers were able to see the bank statements of third parties in online banking. In a hacker attack on a web shop customer data was copied without authorization; A hotel could not rule out that an extortionate hacker attack, credit card or other customer information from his booking system in the wrong hands. Dagmar Hartge:
The obligation to register for data protection violations helps to quickly draw the right conclusions from breakdowns or errors. So that I can intervene if necessary, it is not enough to tell me at some point that something has happened. Rather, immediate and detailed information on the scope, consequences and risks as well as on the measures taken is required. However, these data breach reporting requirements are often not met. Incomplete or delayed notifications or the lack of high-risk information of the persons concerned can be punished with a fine. I will use it in the future. Basically: Dear once too much than once too little to report.
The legal basis of the notification requirement is Article 33 of the GDPR. The controller shall notify the supervisory authority of the breach of personal data protection without undue delay, if possible within 72 hours of its being made known, unless there is likely to be no risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons. The regulation specifies in detail what information is required. Full documentation is required. In the case of a high risk, according to Article 34 DS-BER, the data subjects must be informed. As far as social data are concerned, social service providers must additionally inform the technical and legal supervision (§ 83a Tenth Book of the Social Code). In the case of reported data breaches, it is the responsibility of the Land Commissioners to ensure that those responsible limit the damage to the data subjects, inform them if necessary, and take measures to prevent future incidents. The responsible persons should ensure organisationally that they can fulfill their obligation to report quickly and comprehensively if necessary.

Responsible:
Sven Müller
