My data, the administration and me
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection issues Privacy Guidelines for Citizens

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 26.07.2019
The data protection reform 2018 is well over a year old. Most citizens have already had their first encounters with the new one
Data protection law. Bavarian state authorities and local authorities also often published extensive data protection notices, asked for consent to the processing of personal data or behaved
otherwise than before - "for privacy reasons", as it was then called.
Privacy is not just a matter for privacy regulators. each
Citizens and every citizen is required when it comes to securing the
own space of freedom in an increasingly digitized world. The
published by the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection "My data, the administration and I - signpost through the
World Data Protection Regulation "should provide the necessary
To impart know-how.
The privacy guide for citizens leads initially in
the most important basic structures and terms of data protection law.
The focus is then on the data subjects of the General Data Protection Regulation. These include, inter alia, the rights to information,
Correction and cancellation as well as the right of objection. A look at the
Data protection supervision and the right of appeal show how data subjects can defend their privacy rights.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri: "With the new Privacy Policy Guide
I the somewhat cumbersome topic, privacy 'for all more accessible
do. The book deliberately focuses on the activity of the book
Bavarian public authorities. This also applies to the numerous contain your personality right - our mission

Press release dated 26.07.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

examples. Interested citizens from other states or European countries can benefit from the Bavarian
But privacy policy also benefit: After all, the General Data Protection Regulation applies directly in all Member States of the European Union. "
The Privacy Guide for Citizens is free
available. A PDF version is available today on the website of
Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de in the category "Data Protection Reform 2018" for download
ready.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
