General Data Protection Regulation: look
focus on their strengths and opportunities!
Conclusion of the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection
Reason for the 13th European Data Protection Day

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 28.01.2019
On January 28, the data protection conference on the occasion of the
13th European Data Protection Day in Berlin on the first experiences
with the General Data Protection Regulation (DSGVO). The DSGVO is valid since
25. May 2018 in Germany and thus also in Bavaria directly and
general.
According to the impression of the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection, many of them came to the fore and at the beginning of the DSGVO
unfounded fears fueled. Anyway, in 2018, especially
bureaucratic burdens and imminent fines are discussed with the
DSGVO could go along. Documentation requirements for volunteers
Guided associations, the dismantling of name badges on doorbells
and the non-hanging of children's wishes on local Christmas trees so far the headlines.
Not least the case of the data clause regarding about a thousand people
of public life as journalists and politicians has shown: in the
Discussions were often the actual objectives of the GDPR
- such as the transparency of processing for the
affected people and effectively securing IT systems that
ensures an intimate and confidential data processing.
The purpose of the GDPR is, first and foremost, to ensure that Europe receives the
Using the opportunities of digitization while maintaining privacy
effectively protects people. In addition, EU data protection law has the right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 25.01.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

Although the requirements for the processing of personal data have been partially lowered, in line with previous German law. In return, however, it has strengthened the rights of those affected.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri: "The data protection year 2018 was in the public domain
Discussion above all characterized by quirky seeming individual cases and bureaucratic burdens, the DSGVO brings with it. In contrast,
In 2019, we should focus more on how the DSGVO
strengthens the rights of those affected and what positive answers they provide
the challenges of the future. "

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.

The Privacy Conference consists of the Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the
Federal and states.
Its purpose is to protect and protect the fundamental principles of data protection, to achieve a uniform application of European and national data protection law and to work together for
to continue its development.
