

                                    [pic]

                     Hellenic Data Protection Authority


                                                        Αthens  30 July 2019
                                                    Prot. Nr..: G./Ext./5297

                                Press release

  Exercise of the Hellenic DPA’s corrective powers pursuant to the GDPR for
 selection and application of inappropriate legal basis and violation of the
                  principle of accountability by a company

                 Company fined €150,000 by the Hellenic DPA

The  Hellenic  Data  Protection  Authority,  in  response  to  a  complaint,
conducted an ex officio investigation of the lawfulness  of  the  processing
of personal data of the employees  of  the  company  ‘PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS
BUSINESS SOLUTIONS SA’ (PWC  BS).  According  to  the  above  complaint  the
employees were required to  provide  consent  to  the  processing  of  their
personal data.

  The DPA considered that PWC BS as the controller:

  i.  has unlawfully processed the personal data of its employees  contrary
to the provisions of Article 5(1)(a) indent (a) of the GDPR  since  it  used
an inappropriate legal basis.
  ii.  has processed the personal data of its employees in  an  unfair  and
non-transparent manner contrary to the provisions of Article 5(1)(a)  indent
(b) and (c) of the GDPR  giving  them  the  false  impression  that  it  was
processing their data under the legal basis of consent pursuant  to  Article
6(1)(a) of the GDPR, while in reality it was processing their data  under  a
different legal basis about which the employees had never been informed.
iii.  although it was responsible in its capacity as the controller, it  was
not able to demonstrate compliance with Article 5(1) of the GDPR,  and  that
it violated the principle of accountability set out in Article 5(2)  of  the
GDPR by  transferring  the  burden  of  proof  of  compliance  to  the  data
subjects.
      The Hellenic DPA, after ascertaining the infringements  of  the  GDPR,
decided  that  in  this  case  it  should  exercise  the  corrective  powers
conferred on it under Article 58(2)  of  the  GDPR  by  imposing  corrective
measures, and that it would  order  the  company  in  its  capacity  as  the
controller within three (3) months:
    - to bring the processing operations of its employees’ personal data  as
      described in Annex I submitted by the company into compliance with the
      provisions of the GDPR;
    - to restore the  correct  application  of  the  provisions  of  Article
      5(1)(a) and (2) in conjunction  with  Article  6(1)  of  the  GDPR  in
      accordance with the grounds of the decision;
    - to subsequently restore the correct application of  the  rest  of  the
      provisions  of  Article  5(1)(b)-(f)  of  the  GDPR  insofar  as   the
      infringement  established  affects  the  internal   organisation   and
      compliance with the  provisions  of  the  GDPR  taking  all  necessary
      measures under the accountability principle.
   Moreover, as the above corrective measure is not sufficient in itself  to
restore compliance with the GDPR  provisions  infringed,  the  Hellenic  DPA
considered that, based on the circumstances  identified  in  this  case  and
under  Article  58(2)(i),  an  additional   effective,   proportionate   and
dissuasive administrative fine should be imposed in accordance with  Article
83 of the GDPR, which amounts to one hundred and fifty thousand  Euros  (EUR
150,000.00).

     The Decision (in Greek) is available on www.dpa.gr (( “Decisions”)

           A summary of the Decision (in English) is available on
  http://www.dpa.gr/portal/page?_pageid=33,43590&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL


                                                   Communications Department


