GZ: DSB-D123.311 / 0003-DSB / 2019 dated 21.2.2019 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The Data Protection Authority decides on the data protection complaint of Mag. Karl A *** (Complainant) of 10 August 2018 against the Federal Chancellery (Respondent) for breach of the secrecy and privacy laws Right to information as follows: 1. The complaint is partially complied with and it is determined that the Respondent has violated the complainant's right to secrecy by improperly processing his personal information under the accreditation system for the "Growth in Transition" conference Has. 2. The appeal is dismissed in respect of a violation of the right to information. Legal basis: §§ 1 (1) and (2), 24 (1) and (5) of the Data Protection Act (DSG), BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended; Art. 6 para. 1 lit. a and c, Art. 7, Art. 12 para. 1 and 2, Art. 13, Art. 57 para. 1 lit. f and Article 77 (1) of the General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR, OJ EPO 1. OJ L 119, 04.05.2016, p. 1. EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. By submission of 10 August 2018, the complainant essentially alleged that the Federal Ministry for Sustainability and Tourism held a conference in November 2018 a more detailed topic. However, in order to attend this conference, a registration process must be completed. However, this extensive process would violate the GDPR in several ways: the data subject's processing of information by the Respondent would be too late because the information would be provided only at the end of the registration process. At this point in time, the user must already provide personal data twice, which is why Art. 13 GDPR has been infringed. Also, a violation of Article 13 (2) GDPR is to be recognized in that the data subjects were not informed about the consequences of the non-provision of the requested data or the revocation of consent. Moreover, it was not possible to attend the conference without consent to data processing, because no other form of consent was provided. The Respondent therefore infringes Article 7 (1) and Article 6 GDPR. In addition, the information provided by the respondent on data transfers was intransparent and appeared to have no apparent legal basis (Articles 6, 12 and 13 GDPR). 2. By letter of 8 October 2018, the complainant stated that he agreed with the data protection authority's approach, in so far as the inadequate information was alleged, to invoke Article 13 GDPR and the defective lawfulness of the processing (Arts 7 DSGVO) as an alleged infringement in the right to secrecy (§ 1 DSG) to treat. 3. By comment of 9 November 2018, the Respondent essentially alleged that the lack of information was prompted to immediately insert data protection information on the first page of the input form for the registration account during the accreditation process. This ensures that at the time of initial log-on in this system, even before entering the data, the information about data processing operations takes place. From the now up-to-date text on information regarding data protection, it is now clear that the purpose of the data processing is the registration in the accreditation system and this is a prerequisite for participation in an event. Thus, Art. 13 para. 2 lit. e DSGVO met. On the allegation that personal data would not be processed on the basis of a voluntary consent, it should be stated that the processing of the personal data required is mandatory for organizational, and in particular for security police reasons. Alternative data collections, such as E-mail would be subject to the same data protection requirements and could not be administrated in view of the large number of participants. The information provided on the data transmission was not intransparent and would not be transmitted without identifiable legal basis, since the accreditation system was part of the security concept of each event and therefore developed in close coordination with the BAT / BMI. The legal basis for the transfer of the data to the security authorities for the security check of event participants and conference service providers is regulated in § 55a Abs. 1 Z 2 SPG. Such a security clearance was foreseen at high-level political events and would take place on the basis of the requirements of the security authorities. 4. By letter dated 27 December 2018, the Respondent also stated which personal data needed to be processed in the course of the accreditation process. The procedural conference was not classified as an event at the political level, which is why no security check of the participants was carried out. 5. By observations of 15 February 2019, the complainant alleged, within the framework of the hearing of the parties, that the respondents had failed to clarify which data processes were involved in the accreditation process. Not only during the registration process but also now, the Respondent is unwilling to disclose the data processing performed. In particular, it remains unanswered whether personal data has been transmitted to third parties, in particular to security authorities or to "conference organizers". He also fails to explain whether the complainant's personal data has been transmitted to the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the information provided by the respondent does not contain any information on the duration of the processing pursuant to Art. 13 (2) lit. a GDPR. It was therefore still unclear whether the data processed in the context of accreditation would continue to be processed by the respondent or a recipient of that data. In addition, the data processing is also lacking a suitable legal basis. On the one hand, the respondent's view was that the complainant's effective consent had existed, and, on the other hand, he referred to the provisions of § 55a SPG. However, the procedural event was not an "event on a political level". Even if security measures had been necessary in favor of one or more of the persons named in § 55a (1) (2) SPG in the course of the event, this interference with the fundamental right to data protection was disproportionate. The reference of the respondent to a decision of the Council of Ministers is also irrelevant, since this does not constitute a suitable legal basis. In addition, there is no effective consent, since this would have been a mandatory condition for participation in the conference proceedings, and even if such lack of transparency of the data protection information would not be effective. B. Object of the complaint The subject of the complaint is the question of whether the Respondent has violated the Appellant's right pursuant to Art. 13 GDPR by failing to comply with his duty to provide personal data to the complainant and to remedy this deficiency during the proceedings before the Data Protection Authority has not eliminated. In addition, the subject of the complaint is to clarify whether the Respondent infringed his right under § 1 DSG when processing the personal data of the complainant, as the complainant does not consent to the processing of the data and has no legal basis therefor. C. Findings of the facts 1. The complainant registered for participation in a conference organized by the Federal Ministry of Sustainability and Tourism within the Growth and Change Initiative for the event entitled "Europe's Transformation: Where People Matter" on a dedicated website. As part of the registration process, he gave his name and surname as well as his e-mail address on this website in order to receive a "registration link". 2. He was then sent to the e-mail address provided in English a message containing - in part - the following content: "After filling in your name and email address you will receive an email with a registration link. Please click on the link to create an account and use your personal e-mail adress. After confirming your e-mail address, you will be asked to give your passport (...) Please note that the Venue is only accessible to accredited individuals. (...) Since this event is part of the Austrian Presidency of the Council of the European Union Security checks are very high. All personal information provided during the registration will be processed in accordance with the Austrian Data Protection Act and the General Data Protection Regulation. "(Translation by the Data Protection Authority:" After entering your name and email address you will receive an email with Please click on this link to create an account and use your personal e-mail address and any password After confirming your e-mail address you may enter your details (or that of a third party) Please note that the venue is only accessible to accredited persons (...) As this event is part of the Austrian Presidency Security Council is very high, all persons indicated on registration n-related data are processed in accordance with the Austrian Data Protection Act and the General Data Protection Regulation. (...) ") 3. An account is to be created via the registration link, in which the name and surname as well as an e-mail address are obligatory. Once the "Accounts" have been created, the first and last name, gender, nationality, e-mail address and job title (delegation / organization) are to be named again. In addition, under "ID card" a photo for identification (eg passport, driver's license) and under "Photo" upload a photograph of the registrar's face. 4. The completion of the registration process is made by clicking on a box "with submitting these changes I agree that I have read and accepted the privacy policy" and clicking the button "Save". The "Privacy Policy" contains in English and others. following information: "- My data will be used so that I may be accredited to attending events organized by the Austrian Precision of the Coucil of the EU in the second half of 2018. The" controller "as defined in the DSG 2000 and the GDPR is entiteled to use my data for this purpose. The "controller" is therefore entitled to pass my data to the competent austrian security authorities for scrutiny. - I agree with my data being forwarded to the federal ministries responsible for individual events, as well as conference organizers hired by the ministries to organize the events. The federal ministries and conference organizers are bound to treat with the same dilligence as the "controller" defined in the DSG 2000 and the GDPR. - By providing and transmitting my data, I give my consent in accordance with § 8 para. 1 subpara 2 DSG 2000 and in accordance with Article 6 para 1 (a) GDPR and § 1 para 2 of the Data Protection Amendment Act 2018, that my data may be used and transferred as described above. I am entitled to withdraw my consent at any time and without giving a reason. To do so, I need to inform the Federal Chancellery of Austria of my intention to withdraw my consent. - I acknowledge my personal data that are processed for the purpose described above. (...) "(Translation by the Data Protection Authority:" - My data will be used to accredit me for events of the Austrian EU Presidency in the second half of 2018. The "responsible" within the meaning of the DSG 2000 and the GDPR is entitled, my The "controller" is also entitled to pass on my data to the competent Austrian security authorities for control purposes - I agree that my data may be forwarded to the Federal Ministries responsible for individual events as well as to the Ministries with the The federal ministries and conference organizers are obliged to treat my data with the same care as the "responsible person" defined in the DSG 2000 and DSGVO - By providing and transmitting my data, I give my consent in accordance with § 8 para. 1 no. 2 DSG 2000 and in accordance with § 6 para. 1 lit. a DSGVO and § 1 Abs. 2 DSG 2018 that my data may be used and distributed as described above. I have the right to withdraw my consent at any time without giving reasons. For this I have to inform the Austrian Federal Chancellery about my intention to revoke my consent. - I acknowledge that my personal data, processed for the purpose described above, will be deleted immediately after expiry of the Austrian EU Presidency. ") Furthermore, the privacy statement refers to the rights of data subjects and to the right of appeal the data protection authority. The address of the person responsible as well as the data protection officer are also listed. 5. Information about data processing was provided only at the end of the registration process, after the complainant had to provide personal data twice already. 6. The complainant has successfully accredited for the procedural conference and received a confirmation email. 7. Without the provision of the data, registration in the accreditation system is not possible. Another form of "accreditation" to the subject conference was not possible. 8. The mandatory data to be requested in the accreditation system for persons to be subject to a security check shall include the category data: first and last name, date of birth, gender, nationality, delegation or organization name, e-mail address, photo for the Badge and a valid identification document. For persons who are not subject to a security check, the data in the category: first and last name, e-mail address, photo and scan of a valid identification document. 9. The subject conference was an event that did not require a security screening of the participants. 10. In the accreditation system, data concerning the category of given name, surname, date of birth, gender, nationality, delegation or organization name, e-mail address, photo for the badge and a valid identification document were requested in relation to the conference proceedings. Proof of evidence: The findings are based on the complainant's and the Respondent's consistent submissions in their letters to the DPA and the attached documents. The determination of the date on which the information was given is based on the applicant's undisputed submissions. In addition, he / she has already received an e-mail regarding the registration prior to the announcement of the privacy policy. The determination regarding the form of the registration for the conference results from the e-mail traffic with the responsible party enclosed with the complainant as well as from the respondent's statement of 9 November 2018. The findings on which categories of data are requested in the course of the conference From the legal point of view, it follows: On the obligation to provide information pursuant to Art. 13 DSGVO According to Art. 12 (1) GDPR, the person responsible must take appropriate measures to protect the data subject all the information required under Articles 13 and 14 and all communications pursuant to Articles 15 to 22 and 34 relating to processing must be provided in a clear and simple language in a precise, transparent, comprehensible and easily accessible form. Admittedly, this regulation leaves open whether and to what extent information has to be translated in the respective national language. However, in view of the requirement of comprehensibility for the data subject, which is also highlighted in recital 58, and the market place principle of Article 3 (1) GDPR, it must be assumed that the information must in principle be provided in the respective national language (cf. Ehmann / Selmayr, DS-GVO, Commentary, Art 12, Rz. 19 and Paal / Pauly, General Data Protection Regulation, Art. 12, para. 35). In the present case, the fact that the information to the complainant was made in English only and not also in German did not go any further, because the event in question was addressed to an English - speaking audience and the complainant had not put forward the English Language not to be powerful. Art. 13 DSGVO is to be understood as the basis for the data subject rights according to Chapter III (rights of the data subject) GDPR, as the data subject first learns at all that data are processed by a specific person responsible for them. Recital 60 also points to the principle of fair and transparent processing, which allows the data subject to be informed of the existence and purpose of the processing operation. The importance of information is also emphasized by the ECJ in its case-law (see also the legal position under Directive 95/46 / EC, the judgment of 1 October 2015, C-201/14). The time of the provision of information is stipulated in Art. 13 (1) GDPR data collection. The time of the survey may also be, for example, if the data subject himself knowingly gives data to the person responsible, for example by completing an online form (see Ehmann / Selmayr, loc. Cit., Art. 13, margin no. As regards the content of the information, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the provision in question each provide six categories of information. The information in paragraph 2 also does not include a right of suffrage for the person responsible and must therefore always be made available to the data subject (see Article 29 Data Protection Working Group, Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679, last updated April 11, 2018; in addition Ehmann / Selmayr, loc. cit., art. 13, margin no. 29ff). In the case, the complainant's personal data was collected from the Respondent when completing the online accreditation process. At that time, the complainant should have been provided with all information referred to in Article 13 (1) and (2) of the GDPR. The Respondent was late in complying with the obligation to provide information insofar as the provision of the information about the data processing took place only at the end of the registration process and the complainant had to provide personal data twice already at this time. The data protection statement of the Respondent included, as can be deduced from the findings: - the information on the name and contact details of the person responsible (Art. 13 (1) (a)) - the contact details of the Data Protection Officer (para. 1 (b)), - the purposes for which the personal data are to be processed, as well as the legal basis for processing (Section 1 letter c: accreditation and participation in the conference proceedings as well as consent pursuant to Article 6 (1) (a)), - the recipients or categories of recipient of the personal data (paragraph 1 (e): Austrian security authorities, federal ministries, conference organizers). Since the data processing according to the data protection declaration does not refer to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO, and that an international data transfer has neither been asserted nor emerged in the proceedings, the information pursuant to Art. 13 (1) lit. d and f DSGVO are not applicable. According to Art. 13 para. 2 leg. Cit. the following data processing information has been provided in the data protection declaration: - the duration for which the personal data are stored (a: end of presidency of the Council of the European Union). - Information about data subjects' rights (lit. b: at the end of the privacy policy under "your rights"), - information about the right of withdrawal (c), - right to file a complaint with the data protection authority (lit. d: at the end of the privacy policy under "your rights ") In the absence of any assertion in the proceedings before the Data Protection Authority or the emergence of automated decision-making or profiling as part of the processing of data, no provision could be made in the data protection declaration (paragraph 2 (f)). In this respect, the Respondent in his privacy policy came under the obligation to provide information pursuant to Art. 13 para. 2 lit. However, this is information which relates to the lawfulness of the processing in Article 6 (1). However, according to Art. 13 para. 1 lit. c, so that the list in section 2 lit. e leg. cit. additional information only contains the possible consequences of the non-provision of personal data (see, for example, Ehmann / Selmayr, loc. cit., Art. 13, margin no. This information was provided by the Respondent with its comments of November 9, 2018, stating that "without the provision of the data, registration in the accreditation system is not possible, which in turn is a prerequisite for participation in an event." Legislators have made it possible for those responsible in Section 24 (6) of the DSG to eliminate alleged rights violations before the data protection authority is closed. As a result, the Respondent has thus complied with his duty to provide information under Art. 13 DSGVO. Purpose of Art. 13 leg. Cit. Aided complaints procedure is to enable the data subject to pursue their rights under the GDPR and the DSG. From Art. 77 DSGVO (in conjunction with § 24 DSG) only the right to file a complaint with the supervisory authority can be derived. However, this provision can not be inferred from a right to determine that the information was given too late (see, for this purpose, the findings of the Administrative Court of 27 September 2007, Zl. 2006/06/0330, on comparable legal status under the DSG 2000) , mwN). Against this background, the complaint regarding Article 13 GDPR was not justified, which is why it had to be dismissed pursuant to Section 24 (5) DSG. Infringement of the right to secrecy pursuant to § 1 DSG An affected person may rely on any provision of the GDPR outside of the rights under Chapter III, insofar as this may result in a possible violation of the right to secrecy under § 1 (1) of the DSG (see DSB of 13 December 2018, DSB-D123.073 / 0007-DSB / 2018). In the present case, the complainant essentially argues that data processing is contrary to Articles 6 and 7 GDPR as there is no voluntary consent to data processing and that this is not based on an effective legal basis. As the Respondent's privacy policy indicates, the consent of the data subject forms the legal basis for the processing of the data subject to the proceedings (see Article 6 (1) (a) GDPR). According to § 1 Abs. 2 DSG, the voluntary nature of the submission of the declaration of consent is a prerequisite for the legal encroachment on the fundamental right to data protection. The provisions of Art. 7 GDPR must be taken into account in all consent-based data processing. The legal effectiveness of a data protection consent depends i.a. that they are obtained by the person responsible before the processing of the personal data for which the consent is required (see, inter alia, Knyrim, DatKomm, Article 7, margin number 16, no further details). In order for the person concerned to be able to disregard the consequences of his actions, the consent must be informed (see Art. It follows that the person responsible has to inform the consents before consent in detail about this and its effects. The content of the information must be based on the individual case and reveal to the user all relevant information in this regard. In terms of content, the responsible person can generally orientate himself to the requirements of the information obligations specified in Art. 12 et seq. In particular, the information requirements of Art. 13, 14 GDPR are to be kept sufficiently transparent for the data subject (see Ehmann / Selmayr, loc. Cit., Art. 7, para. 40). The GDPR itself does not contain any legal definition of the term voluntariness with regard to consent. In recitals 42 and 43 of the GDPR and Article 7 (4) leg. Cit. There are only negative demarcation characteristics in this regard. For example, a clear imbalance of power is suspected if the person in charge is an authority. In addition, the existence of a freedom of choice must be considered, which must be answered in the negative if, in view of all the circumstances of the case, it is not likely that the consent was given voluntarily. If the person concerned did not have a genuine choice, as otherwise he would have to fear disadvantages, consent does not constitute a valid basis for data processing. For example, freedom of choice can not be assumed if there is only the possibility of lump-sum consent for various processing operations and not the possibility of separate consent although this would be appropriate in individual cases. On the merits, the appellant undeniably did not know all the circumstances in the context of his consent. Already prior to express consent in the context of clicking on the privacy statement, personal data of the complainant were processed, as explained in more detail above in the context of the obligation to provide information. Moreover, even before the consent was granted, the complainant was not fully informed about data processing in accordance with Art. 13 GDPR. In particular, in the initial input of personal data, which led to the sending of the registration links, the complainant could not be aware of the extent and scope of his (possibly implied) consent at this time. The complainant was therefore also not aware of all the circumstances necessary for the processing of data, since only in the current proceedings in the respondent's statement of 27 December 2018 it has emerged that the conference in question is an event in which the participants none Security check are subject. Concomitantly, the complainant was not given the freedom to provide only those data that were strictly necessary for participation in the event, but had to provide him with all data that had to be provided to persons undergoing a security clearance. In addition, the voluntary nature of the consent in the present case can also be doubted because there is a clear imbalance between the consenting party and the respondent, since the respondent is the Federal Chancellery (and thus the auxiliary apparatus of an authority). In an overall view, there is therefore no valid consent of the complainant in individual cases, which is why the Respondent did not lawfully disclose the complainant's personal data in accordance with Art. 6 para. 1 lit. a DSGVO has processed. Alternatively, in the comments of 9 November and 27 December 2018, the Respondent further submits that the processing of the personal data of the conference participants was mandatory for organizational and, in particular, security police reasons. As a legal basis for data transmission, he also cited a Ministerial Council decision and § 55a para. 1 no. 2 SPG. If the respondent argues that the processing is lawful because it is necessary for the fulfillment of a legal obligation to which the controller is subject (see: Security Police, Article 6 (1) (c) GDPR), that is already apparent from the conditions of necessity, that the Respondent must limit himself to what is required by the legal obligation and that the data may not be processed beyond the required purpose and scope (see Ehmann / Selmayr, loc. cit., Art. 6, para 17). Im gegenständlichen Fall hat der Beschwerdegegner mehr personenbezogene Daten verarbeitet, als für die verfahrensgegenständliche Konferenz notwendig gewesen wären. Im Akkreditierungssystem wurde kein Unterschied gemacht, ob es sich um Veranstaltungen mit oder ohne Sicherheitsüberprüfung handelt. Unabhängig davon, dass der Beschwerdegegner die Rechtmäßigkeit der Datenverarbeitung daher primär auf die Einwilligung des Beschwerdeführers gestützt hat, konnte auch aus einer allfällig gesetzlichen Ermächtigungsgrundlage die Rechtmäßigkeit der Datenverarbeitung nicht abgeleitet werden. Im Ergebnis wurde der Beschwerdeführer aufgrund der unrechtmäßigen Verarbeitung seiner personenbezogenen Daten in seinem Recht auf Geheimhaltung gemäß § 1 Abs. 2 DSG verletzt, weshalb spruchgemäß zu entscheiden war.
