TO:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Alistar Green Legal Services Limited

Suite 1, Goodlass Road, Goodlass House, Liverpool, L24 9HJ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Alistar Green Legal Services Limited (“Alistar Green”) with a monetary
penalty under section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The
penalty is being issued because of a serious contravention of regulation
21 of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive)
Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Alistar Green Legal Services Limited, whose registered office is given
above (companies house registration number:10423973), is the person
stated in this notice to have used a public electronic communications
service for the purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of

direct marketing contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct

marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls

l
8
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone
number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified

a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

2
9

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

Under section 55A (1) of the DPA (as amended by PECR 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) the Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty

notice if the Commissioner is satisfied that —
®
Information Commissioner's Office
“(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements of the

Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations

2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person —

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

10. The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

11. PECR implemented European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR were amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches the

PECR regulations so as to give effect to the Directives.
12.

13.

14.

Lo;

Q
1C O ®
Information Commissioner's Office
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR

notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

Alistar Green Legal Services Limited’s business involves making
unsolicited marketing calls to subscribers in order to generate road

traffic accident claim leads.

Between 13 March 2017 and 18 July 2017, the ICO received 213
complaints about unsolicited direct marketing calls made by the
Company. Of those, 127 complaints were made to the TPS, with a
further 86 made direct to the Commissioner. All of these complaints

were made by individual subscribers who were registered with the TPS.

The following are examples of the complaints received by the ICO:

e “They call every day asking me to claim for personal injury in
relation to a car accident I never had. Wont [sic] go away and
are very rude and threatening. Wont [sic] give me a company

address or real name.”

e “Wanted to know why I had not claimed for accident.
Claimed it was the first time they have called, it is [sic] least
the second time and both times I said no thank you and my

phone is registered on TPS so please go away.”

e “Apologised for calling me, 'under the circumstances’, 'about
my accident a couple of years ago’, they ‘could see that the
other party had admitted total liability and had paid for the
16.

17.

@
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
repair of my vehicle’ (which is true), but they had not paid
out anything further (which is not right), and they wanted for

me to go with them to sue the other party a couple of years

later.”

e “A customer services agent who wanted to discuss the road
traffic accident I'd had on a specific date, but did not have the
details of the accident beyond it being a 3rd party impacting
me, and the date. The date he supplied me was a date I'd
deliberately falsely entered into a number of insurance

comparison websites.”

e “I was told I had had a car accident and they wanted to help
me with my claim. When questioned I was told it could have
been some time ago! I asked the callers name, x, and a
telephone number. The number was not available so I asked
for an address. I was passed to x the floor manager who
refused to give me his surname and asked me very forcefully
to terminate the call. He then proceeded to shout over what I
was saying and when I ceased talking I discovered that he

had hung up on me.”

On 28 July 2017, the Commissioner wrote to Alistar Green to explain
that she could issue civil monetary penalties up to £500,000 for PECR
breaches. The letter informed Alistar Green that the Commissioner and
the TPS had received complaints from individual subscribers in relation
to unsolicited calls. Alistar Green was asked a number of questions

about its compliance with PECR.

The Commissioner received a response from Alistar Green explaining

that the complaints were due to a new dialler manager who had been
18.

195

20.

21.

22s

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

employed. The employee was on a six month probation period and had
only received one months’ supervised training. The company believe
that the employee didn’t notify them of the complaints when they were

received because of their belief that their job would be “under threat”.

Alistar Green further explained that it had begun to investigate the
complaints on receipt of the Commissioner’s correspondence and
discovered that, although they usually have an internal TPS checker, it
appears that the data was not cleansed before being loaded onto the

dialler during the months of March and April.

Alistar Green explained that it purchased the data from a third party
company. A due diligence checklist provided by the company indicated
that the data had been screened against the TPS. However, there were

no direct contracts or agreements in place with the supplier.

With their response Alistar Green provided a spreadsheet which
appeared to show evidence of consent in a sample number of cases.
However, on examination by the Commissioner the data did not match

any of the complaints received.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of regulation 21 of PECR by Alistar Green and, if so,

whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Alistar Green contravened regulation 21 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 13 March 2017 and 18 July 2017 Alistar Green used a public
telecommunications service for the purpose of making 213 unsolicited
calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the number
allocated to the subscriber in respect of the line called was a number
listed on the register of numbers kept by the Commissioner in
accordance with regulation 26, contrary to regulation 21(1)(b) of
PECR; and

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to Alistar Green to receive calls.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA are met.

Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because there have been multiple breaches
of regulation 21 by Alistar Green’s activities over a four month period,
and this led to a significant number of complaints about unsolicited

direct marketing calls to the TPS and the Commissioner.
29.

30.

31.

32h

33)

34.

35.

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
In addition, it is reasonable to suppose that the contravention could
have been far higher because those who went to the trouble to

complain represent only a proportion of those who actually received

calls.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified
above was deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this means that
Alistar Green’s actions which constituted that contravention were
deliberate actions (even if Alistar Green did not actually intend thereby

to contravene PECR).

The Commissioner considers that in this case Alistar Green did not

deliberately contravene regulation 21 of PECR in that sense.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contravention

identified above was negligent.

First, she has considered whether Alistar Green knew or ought
reasonably to have known that there was a risk that this contravention
would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is met, given that
Alistar Green relied heavily on direct marketing due to the nature of its
business, and the fact that the issue of unsolicited calls has been

widely publicised by the media as being a problem.

Each time a complaint is made to the TPS, the TPS inform the company

complained about. Alistar Green would therefore have been aware that

9
36.

37.

38.

39).

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
complaints were being made by TPS subscribers which should have
prompted them to take steps to investigate the reasons for this and to
address any deficiencies in their practices. Despite Alistar Green's
assertion that their failure to take steps was due to an errant
employee, the company persisted to receive complaints in May, June

and July 2017. In any event, it is the company’s responsibility to

ensure that it is compliant with legislation.

The Commissioner has also published detailed guidance for companies
carrying out marketing explaining their legal requirements under PECR.
This guidance explains the circumstances under which organisations
are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by
post or by fax. Specifically, it states that live calls must not be made to
subscribers who have told an organisation that they do not want to
receive calls; or to any number registered with the TPS, unless the

subscriber has specifically consented to receive calls.

Finally, the Commissioner has gone on to consider whether Alistar
Green failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention.

Again, she is satisfied that this condition is met.

Reasonable steps in these circumstances would have included ensuring
that Alistar Green could evidence consents relied upon to make
marketing calls; having in place a contractual arrangement with its
third party data supplier to ensure that the data being purchased met
the required threshold for valid consent; screening the data against the
TPS register and ensuring that it had in place an effective and robust

suppression list.

Despite assurances provided by Alistar Green that it had a valid licence

from TPS to screen data, the TPS informed the Commissioner on 21

10
40.

41.

®
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
August 2017 that it has no record of Alistar Green subscribing to the
TPS. The details of the license they provided in response to the

Commissioners enquiries belonged to another company who did not

appear to be downloading the data regularly.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that Alistar Green failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contravention. |
The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetary penalty

42.

43.

44,

45.

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner’s view is that the
conditions for issuing a monetary penalty under section 55A have been

met in this case.

She is also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have
been complied with. This has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent,

in which the Commissioner set out her preliminary views.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she
should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty. The
Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary penalty
notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making of unsolicited
direct marketing calls is a matter of significant public concern. A
monetary penalty in this case should act as a general encouragement
towards compliance with the law, or at least as a deterrent against

non-compliance, on the part of all persons running businesses currently

1]
46.

47.

48.

49.

9
1C O o
Information Commissioner's Office
engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity to reinforce the

need for businesses to ensure that they are only telephoning

consumers who want to receive these calls.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case.

The amount of the monetary penalty

The Commissioner has taken into account the following

aggravating features of this case:

e The Commissioner’s investigation revealed evidence that Ailstar
Green’s director was also director of an associated company that

had also contravened PECR prior to its dissolution.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making of
unsolicited direct marketing calls is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity
to reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

telephoning consumers who want to receive these calls.

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £80,000 (eighty thousand pounds) is
reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.
50.

i.

52.

53.

04.

55.

ICO.

Informatlon Commissioner’s Office

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque 2 March 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
27 February 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary
penalty by 20% to £64,000 (sixty four thousand pounds).
However, you should be aware that the early payment discount is not

available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:
@
] C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary

penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

56. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 30" day of January 2019

Signed

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Ojfice

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the (First-tier Tribunal) General Regulatory Chamber (the ‘Tribunal’)
against the notice.

Qs If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought js not in
accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that he ought to have exercised his discretion
differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.

4. The notice of appeal should state:-
a)

b)
C)
d)
e)
f)

g)

n)

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office
your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
the name and address of the Information Commissioner,
details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).