02.10.2018 Beware of dubious advertising with the General Data Protection Regulation | 08/2018

Currently, traders receive "urgent messages" from a sender indicating a mailing address in Oranienburg. The letter sent as a fax message suggests an obligation to collect or report on commercial enterprises. It asks for a form to be completed and signed in order to comply with the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation. For this purpose, the sender who advertises with a toll-free fax number sets a tight deadline. Only from the fine print shows that a trader who meets this requirement, a paid "basic data protection service" accepts.
In the last few hours, numerous references from traders have already been received by us. On this occasion, Dagmar Hartge, Country Commissioner for Data Protection and the Right to Access to the Files, states:
A "basic data protection" does not provide the basic data protection regulation. Rather, their requirements were to be implemented equally by all companies until May 25, 2018. Those who have not yet done so, the implementation should now necessarily tackle. But thoroughness comes before speed. A legal deadline for reworking is just as little as a basis for the recording of commercial enterprises. Suggest advertising offers the opposite, caution is advised.
Companies seeking external support for the implementation of data protection requirements should, in particular, consider such offers that are tailored to their own operations, which are closely scrutinized and can not be forced to conclude a contract.
In our website, we provide numerous assistance to assist companies in implementing the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation. These include, for example, notices of communication of the data protection officer's contact details, compliance with the information obligations to data subjects and the directory for processing activities. Also a formulation aid for a contract processing contract, lists for data protection impact assessment as well as interpretations of central regulations of the new data protection right can be found on our website. This information is always free.

Responsible:
Sven Müller
