GZ: DSB-D123.032 / 0003-DSB / 2018 dated 12.11.2018 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The Data Protection Authority decides on the data protection complaint of Mag. Franz A *** (Complainant) dated 18 June 2018 against the Austrian N *** sport Association (Respondent) Breach of the right to secrecy as follows:  The appeal is granted and it is determined that the Respondent has violated the complainant's right to confidentiality by providing the name, telephone number and e-mail address on the website www.n ** * sport.at in the period from 13 March 2018 to 25 July 2018 published in the public domain. Legal basis: §§ 24 para. 1 Data Protection Act - DSG, BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended, Art. 6 para. 1 lit. c and f, 7 (4), Art. 25 (2), Art. 77 General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR, OJ C. 1. REASONS A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. The complainant alleges, by his complaint of 18 June 2018, that the respondent is processing personal data without justification by using his contact details as team leader for contact persons of N ** * Publish sports clubs for N *** sports championships outside of a separate member area for all visitors to the Respondent's website. When entering the data of a team leader and a deputy - who serves as a contact person - there is no way not to publish phone number and e-mail address. Other members had this option. 2. By resolution of 5 July 2018, DP: DSB-D123.032 / 0001-DSB / 2018, the DPA requested the Respondent to comment on the allegations and stated that data processing was only for the purpose intended necessary extent. 3. By submission of 25 July 2018, received on the same day, the Respondent commented that the Respondent, for its 9 members, the Responder's national associations, had a data processing system of C *** Systemautomation GmbH as a processor for member administration use. The naming of team captains is due to the rules to the championship operation, the indispensable communication between teams compulsory, but the assumption of the function of a team leader is voluntary. In the event that a function is taken over, each member has since 25 May 2018 to take note of the privacy policy. It is also stated that when assuming a function, such as a team leader, the publication of the data is mandatory. The participation contract for the participation in the championship does not constitute the basis of the data processing, but does not violate the prohibition of coupling. The publication of the contact data was therefore in the legitimate interest of the respondent, because the smooth communication of the officials (team leaders) can be obtained only by publishing the contact information. Each team captain, including the complainant, would reasonably expect that the contact details would be published. Even against the obligation to minimize data was not violated - so only current team leaders would be specified and the data on names, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers are limited. After the championship season, the data would be removed. However, the function of the team captain is inseparably linked to the publication of the data and is justified by the facts of the predominantly legitimate interest. Restricting publication in a "protected area" would be a major hurdle to maintaining a functioning system and, because of the necessary authentication, would be inconsistent with the need for immediate contact. Moreover, the complainant was no longer complaining because his contact details had been deleted. 4. With discharge of 31 July 2018, DS: DSB-D123.032 / 0002-DSB / 2018, the DPA granted the complainant a fair hearing. 5. The complainant commented on 13 August 2018 and stated that publication for non-registered users was not possible. So you have to log in to view less sensitive data, but not to see the contact details of the team leader. It would be easy to use the already existing members area. A hurdle for communication in the championship operation would not be. B. Object of the complaint It follows that the subject-matter of the procedure is whether the publication of the contact details of the team captains infringed the duty of professional secrecy. C. Determination of facts The Respondent is an association with 9 members - the state associations. For the communication of the individual teams in the championship operation, the current contact details of the designated team captain for the respective season, consisting of telephone number and e-mail address in conjunction with the name of the function holder, published on the website of the Respondent. The data is visible to all visitors to the website. The complainant's data were therefore available on the website for the current N * s sports season (beginning of the season 13 March 2018 pending the comments in the ongoing proceedings on 25 July 2018). There is also a protected area on the site, reserved for members with login details. It shows game results and *** ratings. During the proceedings, the complainant's data were deleted by the respondent and are not further apparent. Proof of evidence: Evidence has been gathered from the submissions of the parties and from a public search on the Respondent's website. D. From a legal point of view it follows: Complainting The Respondent states that the complainant's data had already been deleted during the current proceedings and that, for that reason, the existing infringement had been removed. An elimination of the infringement caused by a breach of confidentiality obligations within the meaning of Section 1 (1) DSG becomes impossible when the wording is considered, because the success of the infringement is already achieved if, in the given case, the personal data of the complainant for a were granted access to the public for a limited period of time, without any (more) legitimacy for data processing. The simple deletion of the data from the public domain of the website therefore does not prove to be an elimination of the negative consequences within the meaning of § 24 Abs. 6 DSG - as implied by the Respondent with "missing complaint" (see, for example, the decision of the Data Protection Commission of 25 October 2013, GZ K121.990 / 0016-DSK / 2013). Legitimate interest With regard to publication on the generally accessible part of the website, the Respondent refers to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO. He pointed out that limiting the publication of the complainant's contact details as a team captain would be a major hurdle and would significantly restrict the championship operation if the login details had to be entered before contacting him. These statements are not authorized. Rather, the submission made by the complainant under the fundamental right to privacy - secrecy proves to be correct. The duty of confidentiality of the unchanged existing § 1 paragraph 1 DSG after the entry into force of the GDPR in the light of the determined by the supreme court case law on private and family life in accordance with Article 8 ECHR and in relation to Article 6 paragraph 1 lit. f. DSGVO on the admissibility of data processing. In the absence of specific rules, this is to be assessed on the basis of the general admissibility of data processing, which is regulated by the GDPR - specifically on the basis of the obligation to legitimize data processing to the extent necessary for the processing reason of legitimate interest: the interest in processing must be legitimate interest in secrecy predominate (see Heberlein in Ehmann / Selmayr, General Data Protection Ordinance2, Art. 6, Rz. 25) The fact that the communication with each other is made difficult by the fact that authorized persons log in beforehand and the contact data from the internal area In the view of the DPA, the complainant's fundamental right to confidentiality of his personal data does not prevail. It is not clear why, in order to ensure fast and smooth communication between members of an association, personal data of a team captain must be made public, and therefore accessible to everyone (including non-club members). The use of the already existing member area of ​​the website would in any case be suitable for the communication of team captains, who always consist of members, of being a reliable source of information, without the team captains' data having to be accessible to the general public. The processing in the public domain of the website, because there was no added value for the respondent in terms of general availability, while constituting a significant restriction on the applicant's fundamental rights and freedoms, was not supported by a legitimate interest, which the complainant's interest in confidentiality his data outweighs. The processing was not required to the extent and was therefore not justified. The appeal was therefore to be upheld in accordance with the rules. Since the legal basis referred to in Art. 6 (1) lit. f DSGVO proves to be inadequate, the question of the possible permissibility of a "coupling" (change of purpose) within the meaning of Art. 6 para. 4 GDPR was not to be discussed, because a "coupling" requires that the original data processing is lawful within the meaning of Art. 6 para. 1 DSGVO was.
