TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

Making it Easy Ltd

Unit 7, Erskine House, 1 North Avenue, Clydebank, G81 2DR

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Making it Easy Ltd (“MIEL”) with an enforcement notice under section

40 of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The notice is in relation to
a contravention of Regulations 21 and 24 of the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”) by MIEL.

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

MIEL, whose registered office is given above (companies house
registration number: SC555654), is the organisation stated in this
notice to have used a public electronic communications service for the
purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing

contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct
marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone

number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

]
Information Commissioner's Office

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
5. Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”

6. Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by
Information Commissioner's Office

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calis for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.
Regulation 24 of PECR provides:

“(1) Where a public electronic communications service is used for the
transmission of a communication for direct marketing purposes the
person using, or instigating the use of, the service shall ensure that the

following information is provided with that communication —

(b) in relation to a communication to which regulation 21 (telephone
calls) applies, the particulars mentioned in paragraph (2)(a) and, if the

recipient of the call so requests, those mentioned in paragraph 2(b).
10.

11.

LZ:

Q
] C O o
Information Commissioner's Office
(2) The particulars referred to in paragraph (1) are -

(a) the name of the person;

(b) either the address of the person or a telephone number on

which he can be reached free of charge.”

“Direct marketing” is defined in section 11(3) of the DPA as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

The DPA contains enforcement provisions at Part V which are
exercisable by the Commissioner. Those provisions are modified and
extended for the purposes of PECR by Schedule 1 PECR.

Section 40(1)(a) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR)
provides that if the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has
contravened or is contravening any of the requirements of the
Regulations, he may serve him with an Enforcement Notice requiring
him to take within such time as may be specified in the Notice, or to
refrain from taking after such time as may be so specified, such steps

as are so specified.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

SO as to give effect to the Directives.
LS

o
1C O oO
Information Commissioner's Office
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR

notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

The contravention

14.

15.

16.

17.

18,

LS.

The Commissioner finds that MIEL contravened regulations 21 & 24 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 14 May 2018 and 17 December 2018 MIEL used a public
telecommunications service for the purpose of making 853,769
unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the
number allocated in respect of the line called was a number listed on
the register of numbers kept by the Commissioner in accordance with

regulation 26, contrary to regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to MIEL to receive calls.

In respect of those calls, the Commissioner is satisfied for the purposes
of regulation 24 that whilst a valid CLI was presented, it did not allow
subscribers to identify the caller, because the company name provided
(as per the call script) was not a trading name of MIEL, and despite
further probing, vague, false or misleading information was provided
by MIEL to subscribers.

The Commissioner is satisfied that MIEL was responsible for the

contravention.
20;

215,

2
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner has considered, as she is required to do under
section 40(2) of the DPA (as extended and modified by the
Regulations) when deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice,
whether any contravention has caused or is likely to cause any person

damage. The Commissioner has decided that it is unlikely that actual

damage has been caused in this instance.

In view of the matters referred to above the Commissioner
hereby gives notice that, in exercise her powers under section
40 of the Act, she requires that MIEL shall within 35 days of this

Notice:

Neither make, nor instigate unsolicited calls for direct marketing

purposes to subscribers where:

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified MIEL that such calls should not for the time being be
made on that line contrary to regulation 21(1)(a) of PECR;

(b) where the number allocated to the subscriber in respect of the
called line was a number listed on the register of numbers
kept by the Commissioner in accordance with regulation 26,
contrary to regulations 21(1)(b) of PECR;

Except:
(i) where the number allocated to the called line has been
listed on the register for less than 28 days preceding

that on which the call is made; or

(ii) where a subscriber has notified MIEL that he does not,

for the time being, object to such calls being made on
Information Commissioner's Office

that line by MIEL, notwithstanding that the number

allocated to that line is listed in the said register; and

(iii) the communication includes the name of MIEL and
either the address of MIEL or a telephone number on

which MIEL can be reached free of charge.
22. There is a right of Appeal against this Notice to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights), part of the General Regulatory Chamber.

Information about appeals is set out in the attached Annex 1.

23. Any Notice of Appeal should be sent so that it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date on which this Notice is sent.

Dated the 31st day of July 2019

  

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SKI SAF
ANNEX 1

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
“Tribunal”) against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a)

b)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that he ought to have exercised his discretion
differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

a)

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8D)

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.
9
1C O a)
Information Commissioner's Office
b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it

unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
enforcement notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).