press release
711.395.2
December 13, 2018

Examination of an electronic health record by the
Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information

The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information is currently examining one
Health insurance and private health insurance funded electronic health record
compliance with data protection and data security regulations. The product
allows patients to submit documents and data on their health and health
to collect medical treatment. Medical service providers may, upon request, include patient information in the electronic health record. Also health insurance
and insurance companies can use the file to target their insured,
their consent provided.
In the context of this audit, there were several deficiencies regarding the information of the
Insured, obtaining consent, ensuring data security and
the implementation of a privacy impact assessment. The provider receives now
Opportunity to comment on the identified shortcomings and eliminate them. In pieces
this has already happened.
In this context, the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information already informs doctors who are asked to enter data into the health record
to the following:
Medical service providers are not required to provide patient-related data in one
to enter an electronic health record. It is true that Article 15 (3), second sentence, of the General Data Protection Regulation confers on individuals the right to an electronic copy of them
Responsible: Joachim-Martin Mehlitz
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 0
Fax: 030 2155050

-2-

data received. However, the service providers may choose the way to transmit the electronic copy itself, as long as this is the reception for the affected
Person is not complicated.
Medical service providers may only transfer patient-related data to operators
e-health records when the request actually comes from the person being treated. This must be the service providers themselves
and on their own responsibility, in particular the authenticity of the declarations of secrecy. A transmission without such
Permission is not only a violation of privacy, but also a violation of
medical confidentiality.
Any transfer of patient-related data must meet data security requirements
suffice. Not only the diagnosis and the type of treatment need a special one
Confidentiality, but already the fact that at all a treatment by one
certain service providers. Data security must be both from
Operators of the electronic health record, as well as the medical service provider.
Patient-related data should be encrypted by the healthcare provider prior to transmission in such a way that only the treated person himself can perform the decryption.
The service provider in this case has to ensure that the encryption only
with the key provided by the person being treated, and must
Prove the use of the correct key in case of doubt.
Unencrypted patient-related data should not be processed on workstations
who can freely access the Internet. This corresponds to the recommendations
the Kassenärztliche Federal Association and the German Medical Association.
Maja Smoltczyk:
"Electronic health records offer patients the opportunity to have their
Store and manage health data centrally. The potential benefits
which may result from this, but must not be at the expense of data protection and the
Data security go. The data protection requirements must therefore already at
the conception of corresponding offers are observed and implemented. "
