THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

July 19, 2018

First aid for doctors!
First aid FAQ for medical practices for the implementation of the DS-GVO

The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI) has
today answer to the most urgent questions about the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation in medical practices given.
Especially the daily work in the doctor's office raises due to the regular handling
with the particularly sensitive health data of the patients data protection law
Questions on. Especially with doctors in private practice, this is the need for information
high. The existing uncertainty has been discussed in the past with training courses by LfDI and others. taken into account in the panel physicians' associations and, of course, in the consulting practice of his company.
Nevertheless, there are always questions in the daily implementation;
in particular the question of the need for declarations of consent or of
Information notices is driving the practice. For these cases, the present question-answer catalog provides first aid for medical practices, as well as orientation for
Patients.
This is a first markup for a dynamic document, the
in the future will be supplemented by further questions from the consulting practice of the LfDI. In this way, a comprehensive practical help for the health sector will emerge, to prevent undesirable developments in practice.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

So come and visit us on our website! You will find the
First Aid FAQs at:
https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/faq-datenschutz-in-der-arztpraxis/
FAQs have also been developed or are being planned for other areas, such as freedom of information, care or association work. These can be found under
https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/faqs/

If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0. Further
Information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
The press release is available on the Internet at http://www.badenwuerttemberg.datenschutz.de.
