press release
711.396.1
February 6, 2019

Threatening letters from police circles -
complete education required

In recent days, the press reported repeated threatening letters to the NSU victims lawyer Seda Başay-Yıldız, allegedly by employees of Hessian
Landeskriminalamts have been written. Berlin also had similar incidents at the end of 2017
given that are not fully understood until today. On the occasion of the current events in
Hesse calls the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information Berlin
Police again cooperate fully with the DPA and the
possible crimes without interruption.
In winter 2017, several Berlin institutions of the left-autonomous scene had threatening letters
received personal data of 45 persons in total. In the letters
There were photographs and information from 21 people who evidently came from police or judicial authorities. The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
filed an application for prosecution against Unknown for violations of the case
the Berlin Data Protection Act.
In the further course of the criminal investigations the data protection authority got only
Limited information from the Berlin police and the prosecutor Berlin. Although was in the
In August 2018, a police officer was finally convicted. To date, however, is not clear how
the perpetrator has reached the multitude of personal data and where he collected them
saved. In addition, the Berlin police still did not explain with which
Organizational measures prevent data protection infringements of this kind in the future
should be. Due to lack of cooperation from the police, it was the
Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information not yet possible, the
To clarify the facts completely and, if necessary, structural
To make changes to the police.

Maja Smoltczyk:
"This incident is serious. When employees are politically motivated by the police
Collecting personal data from police information systems is one thing
A crime that severely damages public confidence in the security forces. I
expect the Berlin police to do their utmost to make this incident complete and transparent
enlighten. Only in this way can such violations be prevented in the future. "

Responsible: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 900
Fax: 030 2155050
