Interview with Antonello Soro - Defense from capitalism that accumulates data Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Michela Nicolais, &quot;La Voce&quot;, 17 May 2019) The extraordinary potential of new technologies requires a statute of rules able to give back to the person that centrality otherwise denied by the digital economy, based on the exploitation of data &quot;. Words by Antonello Soro, president of the authority for the protection of personal data, who spoke on the second day of the Cei convention&quot; Digital communities &quot;, that was held in Assisi from May 9th to May. We interviewed him. What are the main risks to which the digital economy exposes users of the Internet? &quot;The exploitation of data is the raw material of a new&quot; extractive capitalism &quot; fueled by fragments, often very delicate, of our life. The Net itself is undergoing a radical transformation, losing its generative capacity, with the risk of being reduced to those minimal interstices that remain in the intersection of increasingly extended and powerful platforms, fed by users, often unaware of giving in exchange for utility small or large, fragments of one&#39;s freedom. But the monetization of personal data and, with them, of individual identity is not the only risk that an uncontrolled use of new technologies can bring, in the absence of a far-sighted government that orientates its development in relation to the person. Pope Bergoglio indicated the risk of making users of the &#39;social hermits&#39; network: paradoxically, the society of global communication is in danger of not knowing the relationship anymore. &quot;How much does the excessive power of algorithms matter in this process?&quot; algorithm learns from our past behavior and strengthens and confirms our opinions, weakening the ethics of doubt which is the necessary presupposition of respect for diversity and every other democratic attitude. The self-referential bubble of filters in which we move therefore risks making us increasingly intolerant of differences, denying informative pluralism and the same extraordinary opportunities for cognitive enrichment that the network could also offer. As the case of Cambridge Analytics demonstrates, the application of microtargeting and hidden advertising to political propaganda can have disruptive effects on the functioning of democracies, eluding with a click institutions - from par condicio to norms on party financing, to electoral silence - designed precisely to allow the carrying out of political activity, and in particular electoral competition, in even-order conditions. And it is significant that the European legislator has recently introduced a discipline specifically aimed at sanctioning attempts at conditioning, through the illicit use of personal data, the elections for the European Parliament &quot;. What happens every day to the&quot; profiles &quot;of all of us, users of the Network? &quot;Digital platforms base their profits on the sale of advertising spaces tailored to users or, better, to the profile that each of them has drawn up. The resulting effect on the social level is that of an extremist polarization, because social networks give space to content that is known to attract demonstrations of appreciation or adversity, comments, simple clicks, because they are divisive or otherwise aggregating. And generally capable of this are the contents of the highest emotional value, which play on the instincts of anger, fear, hostility, solidarity played on antagonism towards the &#39;opportune enemy&#39;. In short, what matters in the digital economy is the possibility of tracing a datum not so much and not only to a specific identity, but rather to a profile, resulting in significant effects, often even potentially discriminatory, on the part of the interested parties &quot;. Can we, and in what way, oppose this mechanism? &quot;In the face of all this, it is important to strengthen the rights of the data subject, with new implications such as data portability - which allows the pieces of the mosaic of our digital self to be reassembled , also protecting the competition of lock-in phenomena - and oblivion, through a balance between individual history and collective memory. The road to follow concerns the double protection of the person. To be realized starting from an awareness of each of the importance of protecting their data, not selling them out in exchange for any apparently free service offered. And then to be strengthened with a comprehensive digital society government based on clear limits to the possibility of concentrating powers based on data exploitation. A similar set of rules capable of putting the person at the center of an otherwise anemic innovation process should also preside over the increasingly pervasive spread of artificial intelligence in our lives &quot;. How can the data protection discipline be a barrier to possible drifts? &quot;It is one of the most precious resources we have: not only because personal data is the engine of artificial intelligence, but also and above all because the discipline of data protection, even technologically neutral, is the regulatory sector most advanced and more able to bring man back to the center of a change - not only technological, but also social, ethical, cultural, even symbolic - that otherwise risks escaping &quot;.