press release
September 16, 2019

711.410.1

Media educational offer of the BlnBDI nominated for the software price TOMMI
The media educational offer www.data-kids.de the Berlin commissioner for data protection
and Freedom of Information, Maja Smoltczyk, is in favor of the German Children's Software Award TOMMI
nominated.
Since 2002, the children's software prize TOMMI has been awarded annually to digital games for children.
From the app, PC and console games submitted for the competition, one chooses first
Main jury of media professionals, educational experts and academics
Scientists a pre-selection considering media education
Aspects. The winner will then be of several thousand children, who will be the products in
Test libraries in Germany and Austria. Despite strong competition by
large game manufacturers, the platform www.data-kids.de the final round of this year
Competition achieved. The playful and cross-media approach has the jurors
convinced. The offer is not limited to pure online materials, but complements that
digital learning with printed hands-on notebooks that are at school or at home by the children
can be edited, with fun and games always in the foreground. The price will be
on 18 October 2019 at the Frankfurt Book Fair.
The Berlin data protection officer has set itself the goal, not only with young people,
but to children as early as possible to increase awareness of the protection of their data
wake up. To achieve this, the authority launched in the spring of 2018 heretofore unique
Media educational offer aimed specifically at primary school children and their parents as well as
Addresses teachers. The materials offered there have been redone this year
thoroughly scrutinized and with feedback from students
completely revised and expanded. With the nomination for the TOMMI 2019 shows the work
now first successes.
Maja Smoltczyk:
"The Data-Kids offer is especially close to my heart, because it is the first product of his
It is kind of that deliberately sensitises primary school children to the topic of data protection. I am happy
I am very pleased that the expert jury has recognized the value of this project. Now we wait
looking forward to the feedback of the children, because for the evaluation of the products developed for them
Of course these are the most important experts. "
The media education offer of the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
can be found at www.data-kids.de.
Information about the children's software prize TOMMI is available at https://www.kindersoftwarepreis.de/.

Responsible: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 900
Fax: 030 2155050
