TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Leave.EU Group Limited

Lysander House, Catbrain Lane, Cribbs Causeway, Bristol BS10 7TQ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Leave.EU Group Limited (“Leave.EU”) with a monetary penalty under
section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in
relation to a serious contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy and
Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Leave.EU, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 09763501), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
transmitted unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to
individual subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to
regulation 22 of PECR.

Regulation 22 of PECR states:
Q

1cQO.

Information Commissioner's Office
‘“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited

communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
10;

@
1C O 2
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Individual” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a living individual

and includes an unincorporated body of such individuals”.

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “any text,
voice, sound or image message sent over a public electronic
communications network which can be stored in the network or in the
recipient’s terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and

includes messages sent using a short message service”.

The term “soft opt-in” is used to describe the rule set out in Regulation
22(3) of PECR. In essence, an organisation may be able to e-mail its
existing customers even if they haven’t specifically consented to
electronic mail. The soft opt-in rule can only be relied upon by the

organisation that collected the contact details.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —
1

12.

13.

=)
1C O i)
Information Commissioner's Office
(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements

of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person,
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see

paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case
14.

LS.

16.

LZ.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Leave.EU came to the attention of the Commissioner during
investigations in relation to the wider use of personal data and
analytics by political campaigns, social media and insurance
companies. In particular Leave.EU has been investigated about its
relationship with Eldon Insurance Services Ltd (“Eldon”) (which trades

using the brand GoSkippy Insurance) and their use of personal data.

The Commissioner is aware from publicly available company records
and her investigation that there is a significant cross-over of employees
and senior figures between the organisations named above. Leave.EU
was incorporated on 4 September 2015 with two named directors who
were also at that time directors of Eldon, and its sole subscriber is also
the owner of the sole subscriber in Eldon (and is now the person with
significant control in respect of both entities). Leave.EU and Eldon

share the same corporate address.

In those circumstances, the Commissioner considers it especially
important that different data controllers within the same corporate
group have clear policies and procedures in place to ensure that
personal data lawfully acquired and processed in the activities of one
controller is not inappropriately used in the activities of a different
controller. That is particularly so where the different controllers have

different businesses.

In response to an Information Notice, the Commissioner was informed
by Eldon on 20 April 2018, that an incident had taken place whereby a
Leave.EU newsletter was incorrectly emailed to some Eldon customers,
apparently due to an error in the way the email distribution system was
used. It was advised as part of this response that, notwithstanding the

above incident, Eldon data was not combined or shared with Leave.EU.
18.

19.

20.

®

1C QO.

Information Commissioner's Office
It was further indicated within the response that the incident had been
previously reported and logged with the Commissioner. However, the
Commissioner can find no record of this and, despite requests for a
copy of the report or case reference number, she has not been

provided with any evidence to support the suggestion that such a

report was ever sent.

A further Information Notice was sent to Eldon on 27 July 2018 and
responded to by a letter of 23 August 2018 signed by a director of

Eldon (who was also at the relevant time a director of Leave.EU).

The information provided to the Commissioner during the course of

investigations indicates as follows:

The Leave.EU newsletter was sent to Eldon customers on 16

September 2015 as a result of administrative error by Leave.EU Staff.

This was an isolated incident which resulted in one complaint and was

resolved by an agreed payment to charity.
Leave.EU sent the newsletter and Leave.EU instigated the sending of it.

319,645 emails were sent in total to an Eldon dataset. 296,522 of
those emails were successfully delivered and 61,396 of those emails

were opened.

There have been no similar recorded incidents (i.e. where Leave. EU
communications concerning the referendum were sent to Eldon

insurance customers in error).
211

22.

23.

24.

B
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Mailchimp (an account/application which appears to house distribution
lists) was used to distribute marketing communications by email to
Eldon/GoSkippy customers. The same account was used by marketing
staff acting on behalf of Leave.EU. The member of marketing staff

selected the incorrect data file (i.e. the Eldon data file) to be used to

distribute a Leave.EU newsletter.

At the time of the incident one Mailchimp account was being used but
another account was introduced in November 2016, which would

further reduce the risk of such incidents.

In late 2017, Eldon introduced a further control mechanism in the form

of a peer review before emails are sent out.

The Commissioner has considered whether her findings constitute
a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by Leave.EU and, if so,

whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Leave.EU has contravened regulation 22
of PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

On 16 September 2015, Leave.EU used a public electronic
telecommunications service for the purposes of transmitting 296,522
unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to individual
subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to regulation
22 of PECR.
2m.

26.

AT.

L205

25.

i)
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents
to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.

Indirect, or third party, consent can be valid but only if it is clear and

specific enough.

In this case the Commissioner is satisfied that Leave.EU did not have
the consent, within the meaning of regulation 22(2), of the subscribers
for the 296,522 unsolicited direct marketing emails it sent. The
Commissioner is satisfied that the ‘soft opt-in’ exception afforded under
regulation 22(3) would not apply in this instance since Leave.EU has no
apparent prior relationship with the subscribers. The Commissioner
further notes that in its representations in response to the Notice of
Intent, Leave.EU did not seek to suggest that it did have consent to

send its newsletter to an Eldon customer database.

The Commissioner is satisfied that Leave.EU was responsible for this

contravention.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions
under section 55A DPA were met, that is to say that the contravention
is of a sufficiently serious nature, and was carried out either

deliberately or, in the alternative, negligently.

Seriousness of the contravention

 

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because on 16 September 2015 a total of
296,522 direct marketing emails were successfully delivered by
Leave.EU and received by subscribers for whom they did not hold valid

consent.
30.

31.

D2.

33.

34.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner does not consider that a contravention is rendered
not serious simply because it is not repeated, or because it was an
error rather than deliberate. The contravention occurred in respect of
hundreds of thousands of subscribers. That the contravention occurred
on a single occasion and was not deliberate are appropriately

addressed through the quantum of the penalty.

Therefore, given the number of affected subscribers, the Commissioner
is satisfied that condition (a) from section 55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate.

On the balance of probabilities, the Commissioner accepts Leave.EU’s
claim that the incident arose as the result of an isolated administrative
error, and there appears to have been no deliberate intention on the
part of Leave.EU to breach PECR.

The Commissioner has therefore gone on to consider whether the
contraventions identified above were negligent. First, she has
considered whether Leave.EU knew or ought reasonably to have known
that there was a risk that these contraventions would occur. She is
satisfied that this condition is met. PECR has been in place for the
entirety of the existence of Leave.EU (and well before its
incorporation), and its terms and enforcement have been the subject of
regular media coverage. There is no suggestion from Leave.EU that it

was unaware of its obligations under PECR.
35.

36,

a7

38.

@
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Furthermore, a company within a corporate group which shares
personnel and premises with other group companies is expected by the
Commissioner to be mindful of the care required to ensure marketing
and personal data are not inappropriately mixed between companies.
An organisation engaging in the sending of material constituting direct
marketing should be aware that sharing a single Mailchimp account,

housing multiple distribution lists, risks that a contravention could

OCCUr.

In the circumstances the Commissioner is satisfied that Leave.EU ought
reasonably to have known that there was a risk a contravention would

Occur.

Second, the Commissioner considered whether Leave.EU failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contravention. The Commissioner has
published detailed guidance for those carrying out direct marketing
explaining their legal obligations under PECR. This guidance gives clear
advice regarding the requirements of consent for direct marketing and
explains the circumstances under which organisations are able to carry
out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by post, or by fax. In
particular it states that organisations can generally only send
marketing emails to individuals if that person has specifically consented
to receiving them from the sender. The Commissioner accepts that
this contravention appears to have arisen as a result of a single
administrative error, but is of the view that reasonable steps taken

could have prevented the cross-contamination of distribution lists.

Reasonable steps to be expected of Leave.EU in the context of this
case could have included using separate Mailchimp accounts to house
separate data sets and to ensure processes were in place that reviewed
mass-marketing communications before they are sent. Leave.EU
appears to accept that these are reasonable steps, because it has said

10
Gor

40.

41.

42.

43.

4A,

1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
that it has since implemented them (approximately a year after the
relevant communication, and a further year after that). The
Commissioner also has regard in this context to such steps being
particularly important where Leave.EU had only very recently been

incorporated, and may not yet have had an extensive opportunity to

build its own properly consented database or fully train its staff.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that Leave.EU

failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetary penalty

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by Leave.EU on this matter dated 4 December 2018.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty.

11
45.

46.

47.

48.

®

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
She does not consider that there is any basis to conclude that issuing a
monetary penalty in the terms proposed in this Notice would affect

economic growth, and in any event, such a penalty would be

appropriate in all the circumstances.

The Commissioner has considered the likely impact of a monetary
penalty on Leave.EU, including by reference to the company accounts
provided to her by Leave.EU and its financial status as set out in those
accounts. She has decided on the information that is available to her,
that Leave.EU has access to sufficient financial resources to pay the
proposed monetary penalty without causing undue financial hardship,
given the relatively modest amount of the penalty set on the facts of

this case and the level of its cash assets recorded in its accounts.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of
unsolicited marketing emails is a matter of significant public concern. A
monetary penalty in this case should act as a general encouragement
towards compliance with the law, or at least as a deterrent against
non-compliance, on the part of all persons running businesses currently
engaging in these practices. The issuing of a monetary penalty will
reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only
messaging those who specifically consent to receive marketing. It will
additionally underscore the need to ensure those within a corporate

group carefully prevent the wrongful use of data of a different entity.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case.

The amount of the penalty
49,

50.

51.

Zs

53.

34.

Qo

1C QO.

information Commissioner's Office
Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £15,000 (fifteen thousand pounds) is
reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner's office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 6 March 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
5 March 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £12,000 (twelve thousand pounds). However, you should

be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you decide

to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

13
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

55. The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

56. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 15t day of February 2019

Signed

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
ICO.

Information Commissicner’s Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
Du If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

Bh You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8D)
a)

b)

Information Commissioner’s Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule,

The notice of appeal should state: -

a)

b)

C)

d)

€)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

16
Information Commissioner’s Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).