TO:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

London Borough of Newham

Town Hall, Barking Road, East Ham, London, E6 2RP

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
the London Borough of Newham (“Newham”) with a monetary penalty
under section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty
is being issued because of a serious contravention of the First and

Seventh Data Protection Principles by Newham.

The breach occurred in January 2017 and is accordingly considered by
the Commissioner under the DPA and not the legal regime in force
from 25 May 2018.

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Newham is a data controller, as defined in section 1(1) of the DPA in
respect of the processing of personal data. Newham as a local authority
is responsible, and the data controller in respect of, the work of its
Youth Offending Team (“the YOT”), established under section 39 of the
Crime and Disorder Act 1998 by each local authority.
@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 4(4) of the DPA provides that, subject to section 27(1) of the
DPA, it is the duty of a data controller to comply with the data

protection principles in relation to all personal data in respect of which

he is the data controller.

The first data protection principle provides, at paragraph 1 of Part I of
Schedule 1 to the DPA, that:

"Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully and, in

particular, shall not be processed unless—
(a) atleast one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and

(b) in the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the

conditions in Schedule 3 is also met.”

The seventh data protection principle provides, at paragraph 1 of Part I
of Schedule 1 to the DPA, that:

“Appropriate technical and organisational measures shall be taken
against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal

data”.

Under section 55A (1) of the DPA the Commissioner may serve a data
controller with a monetary penalty notice if the Commissioner ts

satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of section 4(4) of the

DPA by the data controller,
Information Commissioner's Office

(b) the contravention was of a kind likely to cause substantial

damage or substantial distress, and
(c) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the data controller -
(a) knew or ought to have known -

(i) that there was a risk that the contravention would occur,

and

(ii) | that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to

cause substantial damage or substantial distress, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.

9. The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C(1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

10. The DPA implements European legislation (Directive 95/46/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to the protection
of personal data. The Commissioner approaches the data protection

principles so as to give effect to the Directive.

3
dedi

12.

13.

14.

15.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Facts

The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis and the Metropolitan
Police Service (“the MPS”) operate and maintain a database of personal
data about actual and suspected members of gangs in London known
as the Gangs Matrix. There are separate versions of the Gangs Matrix

database within local policing boroughs.

The Gangs Matrix is a database of intelligence about gang members.
One of the purposes of the Gangs Matrix is that relevant information
and intelligence about persons on the Matrix is shared with relevant
bodies in order to prevent and detect crime, deter gang activity and

enable appropriate support to those who need it.

In order to achieve these aims, the MPS Newham Borough shared its
version of the Gangs Matrix with Newham, and the Newham YOT in
particular. This was, in principle, sensible and appropriate information
sharing given the statutory functions of Newham and the YOT in

particular.

However, once the Matrix had been provided to the YOT, the MPS no
longer controlled what is done with the personal data contained within
it. It was the decision of Newham, through the YOT, as to what data

was provided to other bodies or agencies.

At any given time, Newham was the data controller of the versions of
the Matrix database it received from the MPS. In other words, the MPS
was responsible for the provision of the database to Newham, but
Newham was responsible for what it did with the database once it had

been received. Whether or not the MPS shared the database with

A
16.

17.

18.

informatlon Commissioner's Office

others as well is irrelevant for present purposes: Newham was the

controller of the database supplied to it.

The YOT ran a multi-agency partnership in relation to gangs, with the
MPS. The membership of this partnership included representatives of a
wide variety of Newham departments (including Children and Adult
Services, Education Services, Housing Services, Rehabilitation Service,
the Data Warehouse and Newham Research), external statutory
agencies (National Probation Service, NHS Public Health and the
Department of Work and Pensions), and a non-statutory voluntary
organisation (Fight for Peace). (The Commissioner understands that
since the events discussed in this Notice the MPS has taken control of

such partnership meetings. )

The MPS had since 2014 provided to the YOT by email updated
versions of the Gangs Matrix for Newham on approximately a monthly
basis. The transmission by the MPS to Newham over email was on the
CJSM system.

The MPS provided two versions of the Gangs Matrix on each occasion:
a redacted and an unredacted version. The unredacted version of the

database contained in respect of each data subject entries concerning:

e Matrix ranking;

e Matrix score (relevant to continued presence on the database);
e Name;

e Date of birth;

e Age

e Home address;

e Nickname;

e IC code (i.e. ethnicity);
19),

20.

21.

2d

@
LC QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
e Gang name;
e Whether the individual is a prolific firearms offender or a habitual
knife carrier;
e Judicial provisions;

e Police national computer ID.

The redacted version of the database did not include the data subject’s
home address, their ethnicity, whether they were a prolific firearms
offender or a habitual knife carrier, or their PNC ID. In other words, the
redacted version significantly reduced the likelihood of sensitive
personal data being disclosed in error, and also of the risk of locating

and harming the individuals included.

Prior to 2014, it was the role of the MPS to share relevant data from
the Matrix with partner agencies. Since 2014, that has been the role of
the local YOTs. Newham state that the MPS has on occasion since 2014
shared the database itself with the Newham multi-agency partnership,
but it does not dispute that it has principally been the Newham YOT
which has distributed the redacted database since 2014.

It is the position of the MPS, as communicated to the Commissioner,
that it had not given permission for the unredacted database to be
more widely distributed, and that that was the purpose of providing the
redacted version. The information handling practices of the MPS have

been the subject of separate enforcement consideration.

Despite being in receipt of the Matrix databases since at least 2012,
Newham has been unable to identify any written policy or guidance
concerning its handling, storage or decision-making as to onward

distribution in compliance with the DPA.
23.

24.

25.

26.

2/.

@
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office

Newham identified that it had an Information Sharing Agreement

(“ISA”) in place for the purpose of a crime and disorder reduction

partnership pursuant to section 115 of the Crime and Disorder Act

1998. The ISA included reference to London Probation, what is now

NHS Public Health and the MPS. However, the ISA was last reviewed

and amended in 2008. It was not specific to the Gangs Matrix and did

not address the Matrix data. It did not address the full breadth of

recipients of the database, including internal Newham departments, the

Department of Work and Pensions and the voluntary organisation Fight

for Peace. It contained no guidance on relevant considerations for the

sharing of the database.

Newham has an Information Sharing Protocol relevant to the work of
the YOT. That Protocol sets out that disclosure of information received
from another body must generally be authorised by the original
provider. It further records that information which is shared will be

considered on a case by case basis.

On 23 January 2017, the MT received from the MPS a
redacted and unredacted updated version of the Matrix database by

email, which was dated 10 January 2017. The ii
forwarded that email to a ee 24 January.

On 26 January 2017, the (MM forwarded the MPS email
containing the redacted and unredacted databases to 44 recipients
within the YOT and at all of the multi-agency partners referred to

above in advance of a meeting.

The personal data of 203 data subjects was contained in each of the

databases.
ZS

29.

30,

31.

32.

33.

2

1C QO.

Information Commissioner's Office
Approximately 80 of those data subjects had a Matrix score of zero,
indicating that they were either no longer a member of gang, had no

further involvement with gang crime or were simply a victim of gang

crime. The YOT shared the entirety of the databases.

On 16 May 2017, a known gang member informed their probation
officer that they were in possession of a photograph, via Snapchat, of a
paper copy of the Newham Gangs Matrix. The photographed page
showed the personal data of approximately 50 high risk offenders.

The MPS was notified and an investigation was commenced.
Identifiable data subjects were warned. In some instances, police

protection was offered.

On 20 September 2017, a member of a different, rival, gang informed
their probation officer that they also had photographs of the Matrix.
That individual had photographs of two further pages of the Newham
Gangs Matrix, from which the MPS was able to establish that it was the
unredacted copy of the 10 January 2017 version of the database.

The Commissioner has not been able to establish how the individual
gang members obtained photographs of the unredacted Newham
Gangs Matrix. Nonetheless, she considers that it is more likely than not
that the matter was ultimately attributable to the wide distribution of
the unredacted database by the YOT, without regulation or control.
Newham’s representations accept that it was also the view of the MPS
that it was Newham’s circulation of the unredacted database which

allowed a third party to provide that data to others.

Since this incident, there have been a number of incidents of gang

violence, including murder, where the victims had appeared on the

8
34.

aad

36.

®
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
compromised pages of the unredacted database. In August 2018, the
Newham Local Safeguarding Children Board concluded a Serious Case
Review into the murder of a gang member named ‘Chris’. He was shot
and killed on 4 September 2017. His name appeared on the Newham
Gangs Matrix. The Commissioner does not draw a causal connection
between this incident - or any other incident of violence - and the
established breach on the part of Newham. She records these matters
because they are highly relevant to the nature and extent of the harm
that could result if personal data of the type contained in the
unredacted database was not processed under strict controls. The
context is materially dissimilar to many other data loss incidents which

the Commissioner has had cause to investigate.

This matter was drawn to the attention of the Commissioner by the
MPS and not by Newham.

It was not until December 2017 that Newham conducted any sort of
investigation into the matter. Despite heavy reliance on that
investigation in its representations, upon further enquiry it appears
that no investigation report was produced. It appears to have consisted
of little more than the qq — and
subsequently the Information Governance Team — checking the email
accounts of two members of staff of the YOT to trace how many times
the unredacted database was emailed to others. It does not appear
that the investigation made any attempt to establish, by discussion
with the other parties in attendance at the multi-agency meetings,
what had been done with the unredacted database emailed in January
2017.

In her Notice of Intent, the Commissioner made findings that the
Newham YOT had routinely circulated by email the unredacted
database since 2014. Newham’s representations firmly rejected that

9
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

finding on the basis of its investigation, which it explained had found

that the error had occurred on the single occasion in January 2017. In

the circumstances, the Commissioner does not make any findings

beyond the circulation of the unredacted database in January 2017.

However, it is also necessary and appropriate to record that:

(a)

(b)

(Cc)

At no stage in its correspondence with the Commissioner in
relation to, on any view, a serious data protection breach did
Newham explain that it had carried out an investigation which
confirmed the number of times the unredacted database had
been emailed. It is, at best, unhelpful for this information to be
provided only in response to the Notice of Intent.

The findings of repeated circulation by email were based upon
what Newham itself had told the Commissioner; a fact seemingly
entirely ignored in its representations. In an email from the Hii
Es cated 4 April 2018, it was stated that
“Historically, the unredacted version has been shared with the
yos and wider partnership ie those who are members of the
tactical group [sic]”. In an email of 30 May 2018, the same
officer asserted, in response to a question asking if it was usual
practice for the unredacted database to be shared, that “This
information has been shared wit partners over the last four years
matrix. More recently, the unredacted version is sent to partners

[sic]”.

In response to the Commissioner’s enquiries arising from
Newham’s representations, and raising the previous information

it had asked for and been provided, the iii
EE Sought to explain that “our wording was somewhat

ambiguous”. That is no explanation at all. Newham’s earlier

10
37.

38.

a0

40.

oO
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
wording was not at all ambiguous. Rather, it provided inaccurate

and incomplete information to the Commissioner in the course of

her investigation.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the balance

of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of the DPA by Newham and, if so, whether the conditions
of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The Contraventions

The Commissioner finds that Newham contravened the DPA in that it
failed to take appropriate technical and organisational measures
against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal data
in contravention of the Seventh Data Protection Principle at Part I of
Schedule 1 to the DPA.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as

follows:

Newham distributed the unredacted database on 26 January 2017
when it was not necessary to do so. Sharing of the redacted database
was likely to be necessary, but the additional data in the unredacted
database was not;

Newham distributed the personal data to an excessive number of
partner agencies and individual recipients, without consideration of the

necessity of that distribution;

1]
41.

42.

Qo
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office

Newham had taken no formal decision and produced no rationale for its

information sharing;

Newham had in place no written policy or guidance concerning sharing

of the Matrix databases;

Newham had in place no applicable ISA or other written agreement;

It is unclear whether Newham considers that its partner agencies would

act as data controllers or data processors. If the latter, the absence of

a written agreement is a failure to comply with paragraph 12 of Part II

of Schedule 1. If the former, the absence of a written agreement

remains a clear failure of basic data protection practice in order to

secure shared personal! data;

Newham failed to comply with such written policies as were applicable

in general terms to information sharing by the YOT;

Newham had taken no steps to seek to exercise any control over, or

otherwise protect, the personal data it so widely distributed; and

Newham had no systems in place for secure encrypted distribution to

recipients without existing secure email accounts.

The Commissioner considers this contravention to be especially
flagrant, and many of the elements of the contravention — such as the
absence of an applicable ISA - were failures over an extended period
of time and do not arise solely because of the circulation of the

unredacted database on 27 January 2017.

For the avoidance of doubt, Newham raised in its representations that
the Commissioner had carried out a data protection audit of Newham in
2012 and relied on it not having raised issues relevant to this Notice.
The Commissioner does not accept that an audit in 2012 is of any
assistance to Newham, particularly where the scope of that audit did

not extend to data sharing, still less the particular policies in issue.

IZ
43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

9S
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
Further, the Commissioner finds that Newham failed to process the
personal data of data subjects included on the Matrix fairly, lawfully
and in accordance with a condition in Schedules 2 or 3, in
contravention of the First Data Protection Principle at Part I of Schedule

1 to the DPA when it circulated the unredacted database on 26 January
2017.

All potentially relevant conditions provided for in Schedules 2 and 3
(both of which are applicable) require that the processing by Newham
was “necessary”. The sharing of the unredacted database, when a
redacted database was provided and available, in its entirety with no
consideration of the relevance of individual entries or categories of
entry, to a wide variety of individuals and bodies without
differentiation, without formal written information sharing agreements
and policies in place, was not necessary for the purposes of Schedules
2 or 3 to the DPA.

Newham could have processed the sensitive personal data of the data
subjects significantly more proportionately, and more restrictively. It
did not do so and it does not appear to have even occurred to Newham
to consider whether it might need to evaluate and rationalise its data

Sharing choices.

For related reasons, the processing of the sensitive personal data of
the data subjects was not fair. It was excessive. It would reasonably be
expected that personal data of this type would be shared outside of
Newham only where strictly necessary and under detailed written

guidance, polices and agreements. None of those existed.

The Commissioner is satisfied that Newham was responsible for these

contraventions.

13
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

48. The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the

conditions under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the Contraventions

49. The Commissioner is satisfied that the contraventions identified
above were serious. This is because the Matrix contained highly

sensitive personal data of a substantial number (203) of data subjects.

50. Inthe circumstances, the Commissioner considers that the
contraventions were serious having regard to the number of affected

individuals and the nature of the personal data involved.

51. Should it be necessary to do so, the Commissioner would further
support her conclusions on seriousness by reference to the

disappointing representations of Newham in seeking to defend the ISA.

52. The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) of section
55A(1) DPA is met.

Contraventions of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or
substantial distress

53. The relevant features of the kind of contraventions are:

e Significant and long-standing failures to ensure data sharing on
the basis of written agreements, documented decisions and
identified rationales;

e A failure to attempt to ensure any degree of control or data
security over shared data of a sensitive kind, with obvious risks

of harm in the event of unauthorised disclosure;

14
54.

Ja.

56.

‘D
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
e An absence of any recorded consideration of what degree of data
sharing was strictly necessary and to whom;
e Disclosure on one occasion of excessive amounts of data, to

excessive numbers of persons, being both disproportionate in

itself and increasing the risks of data loss.

The Commissioner considers that the contraventions identified above

had the following potential consequences:

As to the First Principle, the contravention was likely cause distress to
data subjects who discovered that their sensitive personal data has
been disclosed to an array of recipients (not all of whom are even
public bodies) who would then be able to use that data in decision-

making and actions concerning the data subjects.

As to the Seventh Principle, the contravention was unusually serious. It
was likely to cause distress to data subjects that such a sensitive and
unredacted database was not the subject of sufficient data security
controls. It was also likely that if a loss of such control led the database
to come into the hands of inappropriate third parties, including criminal
gangs, actual harm to the named and identified subjects would be a
real risk. The unredacted Matrix would be a of
identified targets in a context of existing highly dangerous criminal
rivalries. The actual harm caused to individual data subjects whose
personal data was contained in the unredacted database in issue - and
the risk management steps taken on an urgent basis by the MPS upon
discovery of the breach - underlines the nature of the risk. As noted
above, the nature of the risk and harm in the context of the personal
data in issue here is materially different to that in many data loss

incidents investigated by the Commissioner.

15
af,

58.

a

60.

@
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Further, the contravention of the Seventh Principle exposed a wider
range of persons to the risk of actual harm. The unredacted database
contained the home addresses of the data subjects. Many of those data
subjects will live at those addresses with family members who are
entirely unconnected with gangs. Yet the disclosure of their addresses
exposes not only the data subjects themselves but also those living at
the same address to the risk of harm through reprisals or being

bystanders in acts of criminal violence.

The Commissioner considers that the damage and/or distress described
above was likely to arise as a consequence of the kind of
contravention. In other words, the Commissioner’s view is that there
was a significant and weighty chance that a contravention of the kind

described would have such consequences.

The Commissioner also considers that such damage and/or distress
was likely to be substantial, having regard to the number of affected
individuals and the nature of the personal data involved. In the
circumstances, the likely damage or distress was certainly more than

trivial.

The Commissioner has also given weight to the number of affected
individuals: over 200. The Commissioner considers that even if the
damage or distress likely to have been suffered by each affected
individual was less than substantial, the cumulative impact would
clearly pass the threshold of “substantial”. In addition, given the
number of affected individuals and the nature of the data lost, it was
inherently likely that at least some of those individuals would have
been likely to suffer substantial damage or substantial distress on

account of their particular circumstances.

16
Information Commissioner’s Office

61. The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) of section
55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or Negligent Contraventions

62. The Commissioner has considered whether the contraventions
identified above were deliberate. In particular, she has considered
whether Newham’s breach of the Seventh Principle was so flagrant that
she should infer that it was deliberate. However, on balance, she has

concluded that Newham did not deliberately contravene the DPA.

63. The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contraventions
identified above were negligent. First, she has considered whether
Newham knew or ought reasonably to have known that there was a
risk that these contraventions would occur. She is satisfied that this
condition is plainly met. Newham is, or ought to be, aware of the long-
established requirements of the DPA in relation to both the First and
Seventh Principles. None of the matters forming the contraventions are
unusual or complex. Newham’s failures were basic, fundamental and
egregious. They would be inexplicable from any data controller, let
alone one used to processing and sharing all manner of highly sensitive

personal data.

64. Second, the Commissioner has considered whether Newham knew or
ought reasonably to have known that those contraventions would be of
a kind likely to cause substantial damage or substantial distress. She is
satisfied that this condition is met, given that Newham was plainly
aware of the sensitive personal data contained in the unredacted Matrix
databases, and the context of criminal violence to which that sensitive

personal data related. Therefore, it should have been obvious to
65.

66.

67.

68,

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Newham that such contraventions would be of a kind likely to cause

substantial damage or substantial distress to the affected individuals.

Third, the Commissioner has considered whether Newham failed to
take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions. Again, she is
satisfied that this condition is met. Indeed, she is satisfied that
Newham appears to have taken no material steps to prevent the
contraventions, still less steps of the kind which would be expected of a
responsible and experienced public authority in handling and sharing
sensitive personal! data. At the very least, Newham should have
ensured that there were clear written information sharing agreements

in place.

In summary, the Commissioner finds that Newham has been grossly
negligent in respect of its failure to comply with the DPA. She notes
that Newham, rightly, took no issue in its representations with the

finding of negligence.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (c) of section
55A(1), read with section 55A(3), DPA is met.

The amount of the penalty the Commissioner proposes to

Impose

The Commissioner has considered the purported mitigating factors
raised by Newham in its representations. She does not dispute the
value and importance of properly calibrated and protected information
sharing in the context of seeking to encourage young people out of
gang crime, but the sensitive nature of that context also underlines the
very great care needed on the part of data controllers. To the extent

that Newham achieved a ‘high assurance’ rating from the

18
69.

70.

i)
LC O.
Information Commissioner's Office
Commissioner in the 2012 audit in relation to the areas within the
scope of that audit, the Commissioner does not consider that

substantial weight can be attributed to that rating in the different

context of the present issues and contraventions.

For the avoidance of doubt, the Commissioner does not consider in the
context of this case that any subsequent steps on the part of Newham
to bring itself into compliance can be classified as a mitigating
circumstance. Compliance with the law is the bare minimum to be
expected. Nor is the fact that the incident was a single identified
instance of sharing of the unredacted database; that is an inherent part
of the breach and if a single incident is sufficiently serious to warrant a

monetary penalty it cannot also operate as a mitigating factor.

By contrast, the Commissioner considers that not only are the
contraventions themselves particularly serious, but that there are also

aggravating features of this case:

A responsible data controller would be expected, through internal data
auditing and training, to have identified the egregious failings over an
extended period of time in its written policies in particular.

Unusually for a contravention of the Seventh Principle, there was — and
remains ~ a real risk that the loss of control over the unredacted
database would result in physical harm, including death, of the data
subjects. The potential consequences of the breach, as distinct from
the nature of the data itself, are relevant as an aggravating factor.
Newham did not notify the Commissioner of the self-evident breach
when gang members revealed that they had authorised access to parts
the database. It is irrelevant whether or not it believed the MPS may

have intended to do so: it was the data controller’s responsibility.
71.

o2s

cr

‘@
ICO.
Informatlon Commissioner's Office
Newham’s investigation appears to be have been brief, limited and not
recorded in the manner the Commissioner would expect of a
responsible data controller.
To the extent that Newham carried out an investigation, it did not
clearly and proactively provide the content and outcome of that
investigation to the Commissioner during her own investigation.
Newham’s responses to the Commissioner during her investigation
were inaccurate and misleading (albeit in a manner against its own
interests).
No data protection or privacy impact assessment was carried out in

relation to the data sharing.

The Commissioner has had regard to the fact that Newham is a public
authority so liability to pay a monetary penalty will not fall on any
individual, and that has access to sufficient financial resources to pay
the proposed monetary penalty without causing undue financial

hardship.

The Commissioner's underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with the DPA and this is an
opportunity to reinforce the need for data controllers to ensure that
appropriate and effective security measures are applied to personal
data.

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £145,000 (one hundred and forty-five
thousand pounds) is reasonable and proportionate given the
particular facts of the case and the underlying objective in imposing the

penalty.

20
74.

ids

76.

7/.

78.

Fo.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 8 May 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
7 May 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by

20% to £116,000 (one hundred and sixteen thousand pounds).
However, you should be aware that the early payment discount is not

available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:
(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days
of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

Z1
a
1C O 9
Information Commissioner's Office
e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary

penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

80. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

  
  

SIQNE, .. ccsusssciissauvreeanvenmsanacanninacabcseces ,

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner's Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

22
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55A-55E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1: Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
Zn If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

Sn You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

23
a)

b)

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

)

d)

e)

r)

g)

n)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

24
Informatlon Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

25