THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

18 June 2019

LfDI Baden-Wuerttemberg imposed first fine against police officers
- Employees of public agencies do not enjoy "immunity" in illegal
Data processing for private purposes -
For the purposes of the unlawful processing of personal data obtained by the
private purposes has the penalty office of the country commissioner for data protection
and the Freedom of Information (LfDI) by decision of May 9, 2019 against a
Police officers imposed a fine of 1,400, - €. This is it
the first fine against a public sector employee after the entry into force of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (DSGVO) and the new State Data Protection Act (LDSG).
The police officer asked without official reference using his official user ID via the central traffic information system (ZEVIS) of the
Kraftfahrbundesamtes the holder data regarding the license plate number of a private
Random acquaintance. With the obtained personal data he led afterwards
a so-called SARS request to the Federal Network Agency, where he
in addition to the personal data of the victims and the deposited there fixed and
Mobile numbers requested. Using the mobile number thus obtained
The police officer contacted them by telephone without any official request or consent of the injured party.
Through the ZEVIS and SARS request for private purposes and the use of the
Sun acquired mobile number for private contact has the police officer
Personal data from the databases of the Kraftfahrbundesamt or the
Bundesnetzagentur is used for purposes other than that of law. This
Infringement is not attributable to the service of the police officer, as this is the police officer
Act not in the exercise of his official duties, but exclusively
private purposes. The prohibition of punishment under § 28 LDSG, according to which the sanctions of the GDPR can not be imposed on public bodies, is effective
not in the present case, since it was neither a misconduct attributable to the service, nor did the person concerned act as his own in the cases in question
Public office i.S.d. § 2 Abs. 1 or Abs. 2 LDSG is to be qualified.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

Within the scope of the fine under Art. 83 (5) DS-GVO, a fine was imposed in
Height of 1,400, - Euro appropriate. In the design was in particular the
Account that it was a first infringement, in which
only one person was affected.
The fine is now final.
LfDI Brink on this:
"Employees of public authorities also have to observe the applicable data protection rules. The provincial legislature has indeed excluded public bodies - unlike private companies - in data protection violations of the sanctioning. If
Employees of public agencies, however, use official data for private purposes, then in serious individual cases against them personally quite
a fine is imposed. "

If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
