PRESS RELEASE
TO USE COOKIES AND COOKIE BANNERS - WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
CONSENTING TO DO (EUGH JUDGMENT "PLANET49")?
The European Court of Justice (ECJ) has ruled that a consent with which
Internet users store and read information (such as cookies) on their devices
should only be effective if the user actively agrees.
On the other hand, there is no effective consent if fields are already checked in advance or
the consent is simply assumed because of "further surfing" (judgment of 1 October 2019 (Az.
C-673/17 - Planet49 GmbH).
If consent is needed but not effectively granted, data processing (e.g.
setting or reading a cookie) is unlawful. Here threaten both the prohibition
data processing as well as fines.
Many website owners are now wondering how this verdict is implemented in practice
got to. The LfDI, Dr. med. Stefan Brink, is here to help.
Consent for storing or reading information from the terminals of the
User is always necessary if not one of the following two exceptions applies (Art. 5
Abs. 3 RL 2002/58 / EC):
1. the sole purpose is to carry out or facilitate the transfer of a
Message via an electronic communication network
or
2. It is absolutely necessary to get one from the participant or user expressly
the requested information society service
Users do not usually want profiles about their personal usage
created and evaluated, or to third parties (for example, through the integration of external
Elements such as reach analysis tools or social media plugins).

King Street 10 a

+49 711 7 61 55 41 - 716

70173 Stuttgart

pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de

https: //www.badenhttps: //www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/
wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/

When is no consent required?
Examples of consent-free cookies are those that use the "shopping cart" feature.
allow or save settings (such as font sizes, etc.), if they are really only for
be used for this purpose. It should be noted, however, that the data processing
(with or without the help of cookies) in the privacy policy.
When is a consent necessary in every case?
Who uses cookies, for example, to analyze user behavior for advertising purposes and to
tracking or having it analyzed by a third party
voluntary, prior, active, separate and revocable declared consent of the user.
"Consent banners" must be used if, in fact, a consent of the
User is necessary, so in particular data to be passed on to third parties or third parties
Possibility is opened to collect data. Examples include analytics tools, social media plugins, external map services, and other third party elements.
In such a case, the following requirements for consent must be observed:












Clear, not misleading heading - mere respect for the
Privacy is not enough. It is recommended to headlines in which the scope
the decision, such as "sharing your user data
Third". Links must be clearly and unambiguously described - essential
Elements / contents, in particular a privacy statement, must not be linked
to be veiled.
The subject of the consent must be made clear - clear answer
the following questions: what personal information is affected? What is happening
with you? Who gets access to the data? Be the personal information with
linked to other data? What purpose does it serve?
The consent must not be preset - an opt-in in the sense of an informed, voluntary,
previous, active and separately declared consent is necessary (see page 5 of the
Guidance).
No data may be disclosed before consent by the user
was granted.
Access to the imprint and privacy policy may not be prevented or
be restricted before consent is granted by the user.
The voluntary nature of the consent declaration must be made clear and a
Reference to the right of revocation at any time must be included;
For example, "This consent is voluntary, not for the use of this site
necessary and can be revoked at any time by [...] ".
How the revocation is to be explained in the information to the declaration of consent is clear and
to be clearly described. The declaration of withdrawal must always be as simple as
the consent form itself.

The most frequently asked questions with the corresponding answers to the topics tracking, plug-ins,
Cookies, consent banners and Co. have the LfDI on a FAQ website together
