
Serious criticism and injunction to Rejsekort A / S
Published 16-04-2019
Decision
Private companies
In a complaint, the Data Inspectorate makes serious criticism of Rejsekort A / S and announces an order to come up with a plan to have the travel card system brought in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act.Journalnumber: 2018-31-0147
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has dealt with a complaint where a traveler has complained about Rejsekort A / S 'failure to correct personal data in the form of location data.

In connection with the processing of the case, it has emerged that the lack of rectification is due to the way Rejsekort A / S - as a data controller - has chosen to support IT in the processing of location information when traveling.

On April 16, 2019, the Data Inspectorate ruled and severely criticized both the specific non-rectification in relation to complaints and the general conditions regarding the way location information is registered and subsequently corrected in Rejsekort A / S 'IT systems.

In addition, Rejsekort A / S has been instructed to correct the complainant's information as well as a further order before 15 July 2019 to provide a description of how and when IT support for the travel card will be brought in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation and Data protection Act.

In the opinion of the Data Protection Authority, according to the wording of Article 16, second paragraph, of the Data Protection Regulation. a right for the data controller to refrain from rectification by adding additional information instead.

As Rejsekort A / S cannot otherwise make corrections, and in the course of the proceedings has not shown any circumstances that could lead to a different result, it is the opinion of the Data Inspectorate that the processing performed does not comply with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. Article 16 (1) (d) and otherwise in specific cases will not be able to comply with Article 16 of the Regulation.

In addition, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that the processing of location data is not adequately processed in accordance with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (a), (c) and (d).
Decision
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case, where X (hereafter “complainant”) has, by e-mail of 21 April 2017, complained to the Danish Data Protection Agency on how Rejsekort A / S has handled the complainant's request for rectification of personal data on complaints in Rejsekort A / S 'system.
The Data Inspectorate has understood the complainant's request as a complaint that Rejsekort A / S has not corrected incorrect personal information about complaints in connection with bus travel.
The Personal Data Act is pr. May 25, 2018 was replaced by new data protection rules in the form of a general EU regulation on the protection of personal data applicable in both the private and public sectors [1] and the Data Protection Act [2], which complements the rules of the regulation.
1. Order on injunction
1.1. After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds grounds for making serious criticism that Rejsekort A / S has not dealt with the complainant's request for rectification in accordance with Article 16 of the Data Protection Regulation.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate finds grounds for expressing serious criticism that Rejsekort A / S's general treatment of location information in connection with bus journeys does not comply with Article 12, since Rejsekort A / S does not facilitate the exercise of the data subjects' rights and that the processing of location information for bus journeys does not comply with the basic principles of Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation on the processing of personal data.
1.2. Against this background, the Data Inspectorate finds a basis for issuing an injunction pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 (c), that Rejsekort A / S must respond to the complainant's request for rectification in accordance with Article 16, first paragraph, of the Data Protection Regulation.
1.3. Furthermore, since it is assumed that this is not technically feasible, the Danish Data Protection Agency issues pursuant to Article 58 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 (d), order that Rejsekort A / S must present, by 15 July 2019, a description of how Rejsekort A / S will bring the general processing of location information in relation to the physical travels of natural persons in accordance with the provisions of the Data Protection Regulation. This description should include a timetable for the implementation of the changes.
If Rejsekort A / S as data controller, also after an assessment of eg. data minimization, which in future will process location information in relation to natural persons, the description must contain the functional corrections in the necessary IT systems, which ensure a true registration of a natural person's real travel activity and the data subjects' right to correct incorrect information, irrespective of these have complained about this or not.
The Data Inspectorate points out that pursuant to section 41 (1) of the Data Protection Act. Paragraph 2 (5) is punishable by failure to comply with an injunction issued pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Regulation. 2, c and d.
2. Case making
It appears from the case that Rejsekort A / S processes information about complaints in connection with the complainant's use of travel cards. Complainant has stated to Rejsekort A / S that in three cases there were errors in location information regarding the complainant's bus journeys on the following dates:

May 12, 2015: Registered Journey X Peat to Y Station.
January 9, 2016: Registered Travel X Station to Yvej.
February 8, 2017: Registered Travel X Station to Yvej.

Rejsekort A / S has, by e-mail of 20 February 2017, stated the following for complaints regarding the journey on 8 February 2017:
"...
Unfortunately, it is not possible to edit your travel history, so even if the error is corrected for price, it will still show incorrect records. Editing travel history is not a feature of the travel card system.
Therefore, please ignore the fault locations on this trip.
It is true that the customers themselves must identify this type of error and contact us to correct the error. There is no automatic refund.
... "
By e-mail of 7 April 2017, Rejsekort A / S has also provided the following for complaints:
"...
Unfortunately, as we have previously stated, it is not technically possible in the travel card system to correct information about the location of the bus, even if a wrong trip has been chosen. Unfortunately, we cannot meet your wish to have the three journeys corrected. On the other hand, we have now recorded your information about where you rightly went, why this information will be available in your case.
... "
In connection with the proceedings, the Data Inspectorate has requested an opinion from Rejsekort A / S on October 31, 2017 and July 30, 2018. On 23 November 2017 and 21 September 2018, Rejsekort A / S submitted opinions to the Data Inspectorate.
It is clear from Rejsekort A / S's statement of 21 September 2018 that Rejsekort A / S confirmed on the same day to complaints that Rejsekort A / S's own investigations have shown that the bus routes concerned - on the basis of a human error committed by the bus drivers - was incorrectly set and that Rejsekort A / S made the corrections in question by using the comment box in the correction lines in Rejsekort A / S's system.
2.1. Complainant's comments
Complainants have stated that Rejsekort A / S incorrectly records location data at check-in and check-out in buses, and that complainants in several cases have demanded correction of incorrect information, so that the system shows the complainant's correct position and travel.
Rejsekort A / S has repeatedly stated that it is not possible to correct the information in question, since it is not technically possible for Rejsekort A / S to correct information about the bus's location once the driver has set the bus incorrectly. All location errors registered in the system are reported by Rejsekort A / S 'own customers, so that Rejsekort A / S does not make active correction for other possible affected customers.
2.2. Travel Map Remarks
Rejsekort A / S has stated, among other things, that Rejsekort A / S already corrected the complainant's information in April 2017, as Rejsekort A / S noted the information which according to the complaints was correct. Rejsekort A / S does not technically have the opportunity to determine whether the complainant's own information about the travel history was correct and did not have the correct information.
As the travel card system is designed, neither Rejsekort A / S nor Rejsekort Kundecenter can change the transaction data for check-in and out, which is in the travel history, since the information is based on the bus's location information.
In autumn 2017, Rejsekort A / S implemented a change to the travel card system, which ensures that the drivers in the travel card system cannot register a route that deviates from the bus's current location according to the bus's GPS system, and that this change is expected to make a significant contribution. to minimize the number of error records.
Rejsekort A / S is in the process of investigating the technical possibilities for finding fault records and correcting with valid data. This could possibly be done from the real-time data of the traffic companies, where the buses regularly report their geographical position. Rejsekort A / S will investigate whether using this data it will automatically be possible to detect error registrations and correct both price and travel history.
Rejsekort A / S has further stated that most of the customers who use the travel card by bus with wrong choice of route direction are not financially affected by the registration of errors, as the vast majority of bus trips are shorter journeys in two zones, where The price will be the same no matter what route the bus is set to in the travel card system.
Rejsekort A / S 'website regularly publishes which buses that Rejsekort A / S is aware of that have been incorrectly logged on the travel card system on specific journeys. Customers are encouraged to check the price of a trip and to contact customer service if incorrect prices are experienced.
Information about incorrect check-in and check-out is mainly due to the fact that the individual travelers turn to the correct information, which is then used as a basis for correction and registration of the bus journey / departure on Rejsekort A / S 'website.
Rejsekort A / S has also stated that an improved procedure has been introduced, whereby a correction line will be inserted on the customer's travel history at the request of a customer. This correction indicates that a specific journey has been corrected and the correct location data provided by the customer is recorded without undue delay and no later than one month after receipt of the request in accordance with Article 12 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. Third
In its opinion of September 21, 2018, Rejsekort A / S pointed out that on the basis of section 10 of the Accounting Act, Attorney X has concluded that Rejsekort A / S is obliged to keep information on customers' payment transactions for 5 years. but not to keep the travel history during that period.
Rejsekort A / S also points out that report 1565/2017 states that correction according to the circumstances can be done by writing down that the information originally recorded was incorrect. In this connection, Rejsekort A / S states that this applies, for example, in case of disagreement as to the correctness of the information and that the same must apply where it is not possible to determine with certainty which information is correct.
3. Relevant legal rules
The Data Protection Supervisory Authority may state that, in accordance with Article 2 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2. Paragraph 1 shall apply to the processing of personal data which is wholly or partially processed by means of automatic data processing and to other non-automatic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register.
It is clear from Article 12 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, inter alia, that the data controller must facilitate the exercise of the data subject's rights under Articles 15-22.
Article 12 (2) of the Regulation 3, it is stated that the data controller must, without undue delay and in all cases within one month of receipt of the request, inform the data subject of measures taken on the basis of a request pursuant to, inter alia, Article 16.
This period may be extended by two months if necessary, taking into account the complexity and number of requests. The data controller shall inform the data subject of any such extension within one month of receipt of the request, together with the reasons for the delay.
Thus, there is an absolute deadline for responding to requests from a registrant of three months. The vast majority of requests, however, should not be considered complicated, so they must be answered within one month of receipt.
In cases where a request from a data subject is rejected, the rejection must be justified and guidance must be given that the person can appeal to the Danish Data Protection Agency or bring the case to the courts.
Under Article 16 of the regulation, the data subject has the right to have incorrect information about himself corrected by the data controller without undue delay. The data subject has the right to complete incomplete personal data, taking into account the purposes of the processing. by making a supplementary statement.
Moreover, the processing of personal data must always be in accordance with the basic principles of Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation.
This means that the information must be processed legally, reasonably and transparently ("legality, reasonableness and transparency") in accordance with Article 5 (2). The information must be sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed ("data minimization") in accordance with Article 5 (1) of the Regulation. The information must be accurate and, if necessary, up to date. Furthermore, every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that personal data which is incorrect in relation to the purposes for which they are processed are immediately deleted or rectified ("correctness"), in accordance with Article 5 (2) of the Regulation. 1 point d.
It follows from Article 5 (1) of the Regulation. 2, that the data controller is responsible for and must be able to demonstrate that the conditions in subsection (2). 1, are complied with.
It is clear from Preamble Recital No 39 of the Data Protection Regulation that the data controller should take every reasonable measure to ensure that personal data which is inaccurate is rectified or deleted.
In accordance with Article 58 (2). 2, each supervisory authority shall have all of the following corrective powers:

[...]
(c) order the data controller or data processor to comply with the data subject's requests to exercise his rights under this Regulation;
(d) order the data controller or data processor to bring processing activities into compliance with the provisions of this Regulation and, where appropriate, in a specified manner and within a specified period;
[...]
It follows from section 41 of the Data Protection Act that unless a higher penalty is imposed under the other legislation, a fine or imprisonment of up to 6 months is punishable by the person who violates the provisions of […]
It follows from paragraph 2 of the provision. 2, that the same shall be punished who:
[...]
5) fails to comply with an injunction imposed by the regulatory authority within the meaning of Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2
[...]
4. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
On the basis of Rejsekort A / S's data, the Data Inspectorate has assumed that incorrect information about check-in and check-out in connection with bus journeys made by complaints and that Rejsekort A / S has added the correct location data provided by the complaints as a supplementary statement, since it is not technically possible in Rejsekort A / S's system to correct the information.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has assumed that Rejsekort A / S does not have the correct location information regarding the complainant's travels and that Rejsekort A / S has considered the complainant's information to be correct.
It follows from Article 16 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation that the data subject has the right to have incorrect information corrected. Of the second paragraph of the provision. It is stated that the data subject has the right to have incomplete personal data completed, taking into account the purposes of the processing. by making a supplementary statement.
Location information must be considered as factual information, the accuracy of which is usually objectively ascertainable. To the extent that information is inaccurate, Article 16 of the Data Protection Regulation means that the data subject has the right to the data controller to make a correction.
Thus, Article 16 of the Data Protection Regulation does not, according to its wording, give rise to a right for the data controller to choose not to rectify by adding additional information in accordance with the second paragraph of the provision.
On this basis, the Data Inspectorate's assessment is that Rejsekort A / S has not corrected the incorrect information about complaints in accordance with Article 16 of the Data Protection Regulation when adding complainant's travel information in the correction line.
In addition, it follows from Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. (D) paragraph 1 (d) states that it is a basic condition for the processing of personal data that the information is accurate and, where necessary, up-to-date, and every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that personal data is inaccurate with the purposes for which it is intended; be processed immediately, deleted or corrected.
As regards a general assessment of Rejsekort A / S's processing, the Data Inspectorate has also assumed that Rejsekort A / S processes incorrect information on data subjects to an unspecified extent in connection with recording incorrect information about customers check-in and check-out out on bus trips and that Rejsekort A / S cannot determine what information is correct regarding the bus position.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate has noted that Rejsekort A / S has initiated measures to limit the number of error registrations. by instructing drivers, and that Rejsekort A / S is investigating the technical possibilities for finding fault records and correcting with valid data.
However, with reference to the published lists of incorrect registrations on specific bus routes on Rejsekort A / S's website, the Data Inspectorate finds that despite Rejsekort A / S's efforts to limit mis-registration of location information, it is presumed that error registration is to a large extent, and that this may affect a significant number of travelers.
Rejsekort A / S has pointed out that on Rejsekort A / S 'website you can look at which departures are registered incorrect locations. It is thus clear from Rejsekort A / S's website that errors and errors continue to occur regarding buses that have not been correctly logged on the travel card system. [3] The listed bus routes / departures run by Movia show, in the period from November 2018 to March 2019, that a not insignificant number of bus journeys / departures per day are recorded. month that was incorrectly logged in. In addition, there are errors on routes run by NT's buses.
It is clear from Rejsekort A / S's comments on the case that Rejsekort A / S's knowledge and registration of incorrect location information regarding the registrants' check-in and check-out is mainly because the customers - the registrants - report errors to Rejsekort A / S, which can then correct any price difference in relation to what the customer stated about the trip. Rejsekort A / S only makes corrections in relation to the data subjects, who themselves inquire about the accuracy of the location information.
Regarding the rectification of incorrect location information, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that Rejsekort A / S's inability to correct incorrect personal information about bus travelers means that Rejsekort A / S does not comply with the requirements of a data controller's compliance with the obligations, which applies to the data subjects 'rights in Article 16 of the Data Protection Regulation on rectification, and that Rejsekort A / S's technical system is also not in accordance with Article 12 of the Regulation on supporting compliance with the data subjects' rights.
In the light of the facts of the case, it is also the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency that Rejsekort A / S cannot be considered to fulfill the basic conditions in Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation in connection with the processing of location information on bus journeys. Thus, Rejsekort A / S does not sufficiently ensure that the information is processed legally, reasonably and transparently ("legality, reasonableness and transparency"), cf. Article 5 (2). 2. In accordance with Article 5 (1) (a), the information is sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which it is processed ("data minimization") in accordance with Article 5 (1) of the Regulation. (C) Article 1 (1) (c) and that the information is accurate and, where necessary, up-to-date ("correctness") in accordance with Article 5 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (d).
In this connection, the Danish Data Protection Agency has emphasized that a considerable number of incorrect information is processed about the data subject in connection with bus journeys and that the layout of the travel card system means that checking the accuracy of the processed location information is based on the data subject's checks and possibly corrections. contact Rejsekort A / S.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized the importance that Rejsekort A / S only makes corrections for those who apply, and that other registrants on buses who are logged in incorrectly can only correct incorrect location information on their own initiative and thus possibly also correction of travel price.
Rejsekort A / S's reference to the rules of the Public Act on public disclosure and reporting obligations cannot, in the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, lead to a changed assessment, since the considerations underlying the public law's provisions on journal and public disclosure obligations cannot be equated with the technical arrangement of the travel card system, which cannot establish correct information and does not allow the correction of incorrect personal data,
The Data Inspectorate is aware that Rejsekort A / S states that an improved procedure has been introduced that gives the data subjects a better overview of the correction of location information and that Rejsekort A / S will process requests for registration of errors without undue delay.
However, the Data Inspectorate finds that Rejsekort A / S, both in relation to the complainant's case and in relation to the processing of location information on bus journeys, generally does not meet the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation.
5th
Following a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate thus finds a basis for expressing serious criticism that Rejsekort A / S has not corrected information about the complainant's travel locations.
Furthermore, the Data Inspectorate finds grounds for expressing serious criticism that the travel card system does not comply with Article 12 of the Data Protection Regulation, since it is not possible to correct incorrect location information in accordance with Article 16, and that Rejsekort A / S does not sufficiently comply with the basic principles of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation 1, (a), (c) and (d).
The Data Inspectorate finds a basis for issuing an injunction pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 (c), that Rejsekort A / S must respond to the complainant's request for rectification in accordance with Article 16, first paragraph, of the Data Protection Regulation.
The Data Protection Authority also issues pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 (d), order that Rejsekort A / S must present, by 15 July 2019, a description of how Rejsekort A / S will bring the general processing of location information in relation to the physical travels of natural persons in accordance with the provisions of the Data Protection Regulation. This description should include a timetable for the implementation of the changes.
If Rejsekort A / S as data controller, also after an assessment of eg. data minimization, which in future will process location information in relation to natural persons, the description must contain the functional corrections in the necessary IT systems, which ensure a true registration of a natural person's real travel activity and the data subjects' right to correct incorrect information, irrespective of these have complained about this or not.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[2] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
[3] https://www.rejsekort.dk/kundeservice/tid former-drifttsinformationer/fejl-i-busser.aspx,
