THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

August 30, 2018

Greater transparency in the remuneration of top public managers
Companies
Today, Prof. Dr. Ing. Ulf Papenfuss (Zeppelin University, Chair of Public Management & Public Policy) and the State Commissioner for Data Protection and the
Freedom of information (LfDI) Stefan Brink a study on remuneration transparency
from top management members of public companies.
Public companies are economic entities whose owners are the public sector
(Federal, state or local) or to which it has a significant influence (public participation of at least 50%). Especially in the
General interest (electricity, gas, water, waste management)
Public companies are widely represented, not infrequently with monopolies. Examples
are the Deutsche Bahn or the Bundesdruckerei.
Prof. Dr. Papenfuß and his team have findings on the disclosure of remuneration for a total of 6,137 public companies in all German cities throughout Germany
a population of more than 30,000, all districts and the federal and
State level gathered. The study shows that at the community level for
Only 16.2% of the companies examined reported the compensation as personal - 33.3% at country level and 52.0% at federal level.
Remarkable is the substantial transparency gap between public
Carriers. Transparency is 100% in some cities with a disclosure rate of 100%
has become a matter of course, in other cities, the transparency rate remains at zero. In particular, the transparency culture is noticeably low
in smaller towns and counties. On the other hand, a relatively high level of remuneration transparency is achieved by the municipalities and countries in which

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

Transparency laws or publicity rules in public corporate governance codes.
In view of the findings of the study, it is from the perspective of the scientists and the LfDI
required to adopt transparency laws and existing ones in all countries
Laws - such as § 105 of the municipal code of Baden-Württemberg - effectively
to enforce. Below the legal regulation, cities and municipalities can
also take measures on its own initiative and decide on a Public Corporate Governance Code, for example. This contains a clear rule for new employment contracts
from top executives, declaring their approval to disclose the compensation
and waives so-called safeguard clauses.
"The study is an important contribution to a transparent administration that can be accessed by all citizens". Stefan Brink. "It's not about the kindling of one
Envy debate or a disclosure of the individual boards. Rather, everyone should
Citizens will be able to use structures of public administration and their
understand economic activity and give yourself an informed opinion
This is the fundamental departure from the centuries-old arcane principle of public "secret" administration, which in the adoption of freedom of information laws at the federal and state levels
Beginning and the modern understanding of a democratic constitutional state
equivalent. "This transparency also on the boards of public companies
which often provide important services to the population,
represents an opportunity for services of general interest and the public community as a whole, which should definitely be used. "
The study is available here.
If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
The press release is available on the Internet at http://www.badenwuerttemberg.datenschutz.de.
