Activities marking World Right to Know Day (September 28) are taking place in the last week of September. This day was proclaimed by NGOs affiliated to the Freedom of Information Advokates Network (FOIAnet) in 2002, and in 2015 it was voted the UNESCO General Conference by the UNESCO. As part of the events of World Right to Know Day, the Information Commissioner today organized a consultation entitled &quot;Complications and Resolutions of Access to Public Information&quot;, addressing procedural and substantive dilemmas in implementing the Access to Public Information Act (ZDIJZ ) and addressing the challenges that taxpayers and applicants face in practice. The participants were initially addressed by Minister of Public Administration Rudi Medved and Information Commissioner Mojca Prelesnik. The Information Commissioner emphasized that taxpayers are generally aware of the provisions of the ZDIJZ and that they are increasingly seeking clarification, which means that they are active and responsive. The same is true of applicants, as evidenced by the continued trend of appellate cases. The speedy exercise of the right to know is of the utmost importance, which is why the Information Commissioner successfully shortens the average time for resolving complaints from year to year (from 47 days in 2016 to 32 days in 2018), and notes with concern that the time for resolving claims at first instance is often too long, as the number of complaints against taxpayers&#39; silence has increased in recent years. Last year, 288 meritorious decisions were issued in appeal proceedings, with more than half of the appeals being substantiated, indicating that the practice of taxpayers could be further improved. The Information Commissioner advises that taxpayers are more attentive to procedural issues, interpreting exceptions to free access to public information in a narrow manner, while strictly adhering to the principle of partial access. Also, taxpayers should not forget that there is absolutely public information such as. information related to the work of civil servants. The principle of transparency should therefore always guide taxpayers in achieving the common goal of an open and transparent country in which applicants are able to obtain information quickly and easily. In the following, their views on selected procedural and substantive issues were presented by legal experts and representatives of taxpayers, journalists, the public sector inspectorate and the Information Commissioner. Chief Justice Prof. dr. From the point of view of effective judicial protection, Erik Kerševan presented the procedure for providing public access to databases in electronic form, mag. Darko Gradišnik from the Public Sector Inspectorate, however, found their findings in monitoring the implementation of the provisions of the ZDIJZ and the most frequent violations or deficiencies. Mag. Nataša Brenk, Head of the General Affairs Office at the Office of the President of the Republic of Slovenia, in addition to the practice of the Office in the field of ZDIJZ, also highlighted some dilemmas in dealing with the requirements of the first instance bodies. Dela journalist, mag. Maja Grgič presented the procedures by which journalists obtain information, while Dnevnik journalist Peter Lovšin presented his own journalistic experience in obtaining public information. Deputy Information Commissioner Mag. Kristina Kotnik Šumah, however, summarized the findings of the Information Commissioner as an appeal body and provided guidance on how to contribute to better implementation of the law. The Information Commissioner, on World Justice Day, stresses that the free flow of information is in everyone&#39;s interest. Persons and applicants should therefore be as active as possible in developing good practices in accessing public information.