When taking into account the
current political situation concerning the eventual withdrawal of the United
Kingdom from the European Union, this Office is providing the following brief
guidance to data controllers established in Malta who are currently
transferring personal data to the UK and who, as part of their business
operations, intend to continue doing so after the 29th of March
2019. The following two scenarios are possible as on 30th March 2019
at 00:00hrs when the UK will eventually leave the EU. 
1.      
BREXIT Deal
(Withdrawal Agreement negotiated between the UK Government and the European
Commission)
 In
the event that the UK exits the EU with a deal, nothing is envisaged to change
for controllers until the end of 2020. Personal data could continue to be
transferred to the UK without any restrictions or the need of adopting
additional safeguards. This transitional period is specifically intended to
give sufficient time to the European Commission to negotiate and adopt an
adequacy decision enabling the continuation of data flows between the EU and UK
following the lapse of such period.
 2.      
No-Deal BREXIT
In
the event of no-deal, on exit date, the UK will become a third country and free
data flows to the UK will no longer be permissible. In these circumstances,
data controllers will be required to rely on alternative tools ensuring
appropriate safeguards, to legitimise transfers of personal data to the UK. The
use of Standard Contractual Clauses, as one of these transfer mechanisms, is
recommended. More information on the SCCs is accessible at the following
hyperlink: https://idpc.org.mt/en/Pages/dp/transfers/transfers_safeguards/scc.aspx    In view of the evolving
developments, controllers are being strongly encouraged to conduct, as soon as
possible, an internal analysis of their processes and make the necessary
preparations to respond to any eventuality that may happen.  This Office
will remain available to provide controllers with any clarification or
additional information on this specific subject matter.
The EDPB has adopted an information note relating  to the
available transfer mechanisms under the GDPR for the transfer of personal data
to the UK in case of a No-deal Brexit. In this document, the EDPB provides for
practical steps organisations can take to prepare for a No-deal Brexit. The
information note is available on the EDPB website at https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb-2019-02-12-infonote-nodeal-brexit_en.pdf.​