Some health care institutions do not have properly designed websites or cooperate with providers of inadequately designed modules (eg, for ordering) regarding technologies that enable tracking of users. Health care websites are becoming an increasingly important channel of communication through which individuals entrust them with health information, which is sensitive personal information or information of a particular kind (eg when ordering reviews, ordering prescriptions and other services, etc.). Individuals have a legitimate expectation that their health information institutions (themselves or their contracted web solution providers) will not be disclosed to third parties, but this may be due to improper implementation of web cookies and other user tracking technologies. Individual cookies installed (eg social networks) and other technologies such as cookies. pixli, so-called browser / device fingerpriting, etc., hold uninvited information about website visitors and third-party plugin users. According to the provision of Article 157 of the Electronic Communications Act (ZEKom-1), such technologies can only be used with the prior free consent of an individual who should be accurately informed and understood about the processing of personal data - tracking technologies that provide personal information to visitors to health websites Institutions, especially of course health information, are provided to third parties and do not belong to the websites of public institutions. The Information Commissioner therefore urged the Association of Health Institutions to remind its members as soon as possible of strict compliance with the provisions of ZEKom-1 regarding the use of online cookies and other tracking technologies. Health care institutions should thoroughly review the contracts or contracts. agreements with your site maintainers - including whether they have commissioned the installation of advertising tracking technology (such as Facebook Pixel) on websites, or even installed them without their knowledge. When using the services of third party providers (eg ordering modules), they must also exercise caution and check that the provider complies with the rules on cookies and similar technologies and the requirements for the protection of personal data of individuals. Although the user is directed to the provider&#39;s website, it is about supporting the provision of services by a healthcare institution and patients who reasonably expect external modules to comply with the requirements for the protection of personal data, especially since this is a field of protection of sensitive personal data.