GZ: DSB-D122.944 / 0007-DSB / 2018 dated 15.11.2018 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The data protection authority decides on the data protection complaint of Ludwig A *** (complainant) of 28 May 2018 against the Municipal Authority of Vienna (Respondent) for breach of the right to cancellation follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: § 42 of the General Social Insurance Act - ASVG, BGBl. I Nr. 189/1955 idgF; Section 132 of the Federal Tax Code - BAO, BGBl. I No. 194/1961 as amended; Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f and Art. 17 para. 1 lit. a, d and para. 3 lit. b, e of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR), OJ C. No. L 119 p. 1; § 24 of the Data Protection Act (DSG), BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT A. Arguments of the parties and procedure In his submission of 28 May 2018 to the Data Protection Authority, the complainant essentially argued that the Respondent refused to allow him to delete his personal data, even though their retention was no longer necessary. Specifically, he was denied the cancellation of sick days, which were incurred during his employment with the Respondent, as well as the deletion of a record that a reinstatement in the MA ** under any circumstances will not be approved again denied. The Respondent replied in his comments of 28 June 2018 and 3 September 2018, summarizing that the cancellation of sick days due to social security and tax-related retention obligations is not possible. Thus, both the complainant and the respondent himself under Section 10 BO 1994 have the right to assert claims from this within three years after termination of the employment relationship. In addition, according to § 132 BAO storage periods of seven years are normalized, as well as the preservation of the sick-leave data according to § 42 Abs. 1 ASVG is mandatory, since these are to be recorded for payroll tax and social security as billing data. With regard to the record that refusal of the complainant's consent would not be granted, the employer should not be prevented from deciding for himself whether or not he wishes to enter into employment with a person and therefore constitutes an overriding legitimate interest in processing If the note was part of the personnel file and would therefore not be stored indefinitely, but would be deleted with the entire personnel file after three years from the departure of the complainant, therefore on 2 May 2020. The complainant replicated in his comments of 10 July 2018 and 18 October 2018 in summary that he had no intention of asserting claims under Section 10 BO 1994, especially since any claims had already been paid to him. Also he had already asserted his employee disposition for the years of the employment relationship with the tax office and does not seize § 132 BAO therefore as well as § 42 ASVG. B. Object of the complaint On the basis of the appellant's allegation, the subject of the complaint was the question whether the Respondent had infringed the applicant's right to cancellation by refusing to delete the days off sick and by recording that the re-admission of the appellant was not approved. C. Findings of the facts The complainant was employed until 30 April 2017 as **** by the Respondent in the Municipal Department ** in a contract employment relationship. The Respondent also stores the number of sick days of the complainant during said employment relationship after termination of employment. The complainant's personal file included, inter alia, a memorandum of 16 February 2017, stating that the Magistrate Division ** would refrain from reopening the complainant. Following its self-termination on 30 April 2017, the complainant requested by application of 6 April 2018 the deletion of this personal data. The Respondent to date refuses to cancel sick days as well as the present record. The complainant's personal file also contained a memorandum of 8 July 2015, which read in part as follows (formatting not reproduced 1: 1): [...] As has often been the case before or after difficult situations, Mr A *** has been sick and ill sick this week as well as the next week, knowing that he is on vacation for 2 weeks the following week. The representation was therefore not regulated and not informed. Only at the initiative of his small team information could be obtained. In addition, in the 2nd sick leave week a transfer date with the *** Graz, to which 3 persons appear, with the topic [note: text passage deleted for pseudonymisation reasons, in order to be able to exclude conclusions on the workplace of the complainant] agreed. It gives the impression that Mr. A *** does not make much effort either for the team or for his case histories. It should be emphasized that such situations are repeated again and again and each time a file memo is written [...] "Personnel file and its contents are deleted by the Respondent after three years, calculated from termination of the employment relationship. Assessment of the evidence: The findings are based on the parties' arguments in the observations of 28 June, 10 July, 3 September and 18 October 2018, respectively. D. From a legal point of view: D.1 Legal position: relevant is the legal situation at the time of the decision of the DPA, unless it is an assessment of a behavior at a given time. The object of the complaint, however, is not based on a specific deadline or period (rather, the deletion of data is sought, which can take place in accordance with § 24 para 6 DSG until the completion of the procedure before the Data Protection Authority), which is why the legal position according to the GDPR and the DSG is to go out. D.2 On the merits: Article 17 (1) and (3) GDPR, including the title (Emphasized by the Data Protection Authority): Article 17 Right to erasure ("Right to be forgotten") (1) The data subject has the right to be bound by Responsible persons are required to immediately delete personal data concerning them, and the person responsible is obliged to delete personal data immediately, if one of the following reasons applies: a) The personal data are for the purposes for which they were collected or otherwise processed, no longer necessary. (b) the data subject withdraws the consent on which the processing referred to in Article 6 (1) (a) or Article 9 (2) (a) was based and lacks any other legal basis for the processing. (c) The data subject objects to the processing in accordance with Article 21 (1) and there are no high-level legitimate grounds for the processing or the data subject objects to the processing in accordance with Article 21 (2). d) The personal data were processed unlawfully. e) The deletion of personal data is required to fulfill a legal obligation under Union or national law to which the controller is subject. (f) the personal data have been collected in relation to information society services offered in accordance with Article 8 (1). (2) [...] (3) Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply where processing is required: (a) to exercise the right to freedom of expression and information; (b) to fulfill a legal obligation required by the law of the Union or of the Member States to which the controller is subject, or to perform a task which is in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority delegated to the controller ; (c) for reasons of public interest in the field of public health as referred to in Article 9 (2) (h) and (i) and Article 9 (3); (d) for archival purposes of public interest, for scientific or historical research purposes or for statistical purposes, in accordance with Article 89 (1), where the right referred to in paragraph 1 is likely to render impossible or seriously affect the achievement of the objectives of that processing, or (e) to be asserted, exercised or defense of legal claims. D.2.a For deletion of sick days: As the data subject, the complainant has the right to demand the deletion of his personal data from the person responsible, provided that one of the reasons under Art. 17 (1) GDPR exists. However, the right to cancellation under Art. 17 (1) and (2) DSGVO is not considered if processing according to Art. 17 para. 3 lit. a to e DSGVO normalized cases is required. In the present case, the facts of Art. 17 para. 3 lit. b and e DSGVO. Art. 17 (3) lit. b DSGVO standardises that processing within the meaning of para. 3 leg. cit. necessary to fulfill a legal obligation which is necessary for the processing under the law of the Union or of the Member States to which the controller is subject. If the complainant submits that he has long asserted his tax declaration for the years of the employment relationship with the tax office and therefore § 132 para. 1 BAO is not applicable, he misjudges that the obligation pursuant to § 132 BAO is independent of this. For the calculation of the wage tax and the burden of proof of the respondent, to what extent he is a tax debtor with respect to the income tax levies, the sick days of the complainant in any case according to § 132 para. 1 BAO be kept for seven years. Paragraph 42 (1) of the ASVG, which requires the respondent, as an employer, to provide access to documents relevant to the insurance relationship, is also relevant in this context. The retention period is based on corporate and tax law obligations, such as § 132 (1) BAO, and is therefore also seven years (see VwGH 2005/73 of 11.09.1975). There is thus a legal obligation of the respondent pursuant to Art. 17 (3) lit. b DSGVO and the storage of sick days of the complainant, as stated, to fulfill them is required (see also the decision of the Data Protection Authority of 28 May 2018, DSG DSB D216.471 / 0001-DSB / 2018). Since the prerequisites according to Art. 17 para. 3 lit. b DSGVO, was based on those pursuant to para. 3 lit. e not to go further. D.2.b For deletion of the document: With regard to the present file note, an unlawful processing pursuant to Art. 17 para. 1 lit. d DSGVO into consideration. Pursuant to Article 6 (1) of the GDPR, processing is only lawful if at least one of the conditions standardized in Article 6 (1) GDPR is met. Article 6 (1) GDPR including heading (Emphasized by the Data Protection Authority): Article 6 Lawfulness of processing 1. Processing shall be lawful only if at least one of the following conditions is met: (a) the data subject has his / her consent to: Processing the personal data concerning them for one or more specific purposes; (b) the processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is a party or for the performance of any pre-contractual action taken at the request of the data subject; (c) the processing is necessary to fulfill a legal obligation to which the controller is subject; (d) the processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or any other natural person; (e) the processing is necessary for the performance of a task which is in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority delegated to the controller; (f) the processing is necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of the controller or a third party, unless the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject requiring the protection of personal data prevail, in particular where the data subject is a Child acts. Subparagraph 1 (f) shall not apply to processing carried out by public authorities in the performance of their tasks. In the present case, it must be examined whether permissible processing according to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO is present. It should be noted here that, in fulfilling their tasks, authorities do not generally apply to processing according to lit. f leg. cit. (Article 6 (1) (f) last sentence of the GDPR). Objectively, however, the processing does not take place in the fulfillment of the duties of the respondent, but on the basis of a private law employment relationship, so that this action is assigned to the private sector administration. Therefore, the Respondent can also rely on Art. 6 para. 1 lit. of the procedural processing, which is related to the employment relationship of the Appellant. f Support DSGVO. The Respondent processes the note in the course of its interest in documentation, specifically to avoid a possible renewed employment with the complainant. As can be seen from the findings, this is not done without reason, but because of the past conduct of the complainant. In this case, the data protection authority agrees with the statements of the respondent that an employer may not be denied to determine with whom he (in the future) would like to enter into a service relationship, in particular if there is already experience with a person. In addition, as noted, the file memo is deleted as part of the personnel file at the end of three years after termination of the employment relationship. This storage period is based on the general three-year limitation period of the ABGB for the assertion of claims under the employment contract. Therefore, the complainant has a clearly identifiable time from when his data will be deleted. As a result, legitimate interests of the respondent for the processing of personal data in connection with the procedural file memorandum pursuant to Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO. A further step is to examine whether the complainant's interests outweigh those of the respondent. The Data Protection Authority considered the following points: The Respondent is a significant, but not the only, employer for **** in the Vienna area, so that the complainant can certainly apply to other employers. In addition, given the retention period of the personnel appointment of three years after termination of the employment relationship, the complainant also has the opportunity after the end of this period to reapply to the Respondent. This period is not considered disproportionate. Finally, the complainant's personal file is also not publicly available and, as discussed, the respondent is quite entitled to a documentary interest in matters relating to employment. The complainant's interest in deleting the memorandum therefore does not outweigh that of the respondent. It should also be mentioned at this point that personal data may be processed only to the extent necessary to fulfill the purposes for which it was collected or otherwise processed. The complainant's personal data relating to the memorandum was collected during the employment relationship and processed for the purpose of the documentary interest. This purpose continues and therefore does not affect Article 17 (1) (a) GDPR. D.3. Result: From the point of view of the DPA, the complainant therefore has no legitimate claim to the deletion of his personal data pursuant to Art. 17 (1) GDPR and the appeal was dismissed for the reasons discussed above in accordance with § 24 (5) DSG. Moreover, the complainant has a right of access under Art. 15 GDPR to ensure that the Respondent has actually deleted his personal data after expiry of the abovementioned periods.
