THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

May 25, 2018

LfDI brings color to the streets of the state capital!
Continuation of the format "Data protection as a cultural task"

Yes, you heard right.
On Monday, May 28, 2018, Dr. Ing. Stefan Brink together with the conceptual artist Florian Mehnert in the context of the art campaign FREEDOM 2.0 chalk strips on
to raise the streets of our state capital.
What does freedom mean in the dawning digital age for each and every one of us?
us?
How much freedom do we have?
Yet?
What, in particular, is the protection of our privacy in an era that is not
Mystery knows more, the transparency especially of the private to the mantra raises and every demarcation to the public for strange, even suspicious
explained?
This is one of the central questions that the "freedom protectors" are haunting.
"An answer can not and must not just about administrative and regulatory or
entrepreneurial and / or political interests.
FREEDOM is so much more ... ..! "
so the LfDI.
For this reason, he supports the impressive art project FREEDOM 2.0 of the
Conceptual artist Florian Mehnert in the literal sense of energetic and lays himself
Hand on.

Königstraße 10a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

FREEDOM 2.0 is an art installation in the public space of the state capital
Stuttgart. An installation that consists of several elements and in which everyone can participate and contribute.
From June 2 to June 24, 2018, numerous events will take place in the StadtPalais
- Museum of Stuttgart and also offered in the church of St. Maria in the tanner's quarter.
The program can be found at: http://www.freiheit2-0.de/programm.html
"Art is a wonderful medium to ask questions, seek answers and
also to find. ", so the country representative further.
And this is impressively demonstrated by Florian Mehnert. His artistic approach
blends seamlessly into the decision of LfDI to declare data protection as a CULTURE task.
In addition to the classic task fulfillment as supervisory authority, the
Theme "Data protection as a cultural task" in the context of regular events
already firmly established and together with various partners from completely new,
unconventional and unusual perspectives. The lively
Participation in the previous events and the positive feedback
have shown that this unusual approach is a complete success.
With the support of the art project FREEDOM 2.0 this approach becomes one
new, even more demanding and more promising level.
The country representative and conceptual artist Florian Mehnert are looking forward to it
to discover FREEDOM 2.0 together with you!
More information about FREEDOM 2.0 can be found at: http://www.freiheit2-0.de/.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
