Last year, the Information Commissioner&#39;s (IP) work in both areas was groundbreaking. In the area of access to public information, we celebrated the 15th anniversary of the entry into force of the Access to Public Information Act. IP marked a significant milestone with the publication of the Information Commissioner&#39;s Guide to Practice, which provides a concise overview of the most prominent cases. In the field of personal data protection, IP 2018 devoted an effective start to the application of the new General Data Protection Regulation, both in terms of raising awareness of taxpayers and individuals about news (via 2192 written and 3230 oral opinions and 109 pro bono lectures), commenting on the preparation of a new the law on the protection of personal data, as well as from the point of view of the reorganization and strengthening of the body with the aim of ensuring the effective exercise of control and enforcement of the rights of individuals and other competences. The new regulation has posed a considerable challenge for many taxpayers as well as the IP in the absence of national rules on its implementation. IP thus managed 1,029 inspection cases in 2018 (57% more than the year before). The significant increase in the number of applications is undoubtedly the result of increased awareness among individuals, as there has been much talk and talk about the General Regulation in the media. At the same time, a revised Council of Europe Convention on Data Protection was adopted in 2018, extending this trend of change significantly beyond the borders of the EU. In the area of access to information of a public nature, the IP, with 549 complaints procedures, recorded a trend of increasing the number of complaints cases, significantly reducing the time of consideration of each case (to an average of 32 days). Despite assessing IP cooperation with taxpayers as exemplary (in 2018, it did not initiate any proceedings for violations under ZDIJZ, ZInfP or ZMed), it should be pointed out again that the number of complaints about the so-called silence of the authority and again the increased number of filed complaints against municipalities. Positive indicators are also noted. On the one hand, greater awareness of applicants of the right of access to information and, on the other hand, of better response of taxpayers to their requests. In 2018, at the same time, the ZDIJZ-F amendment came into force, which in Article 26a regulates the institute of secondary participation specifically in view of the general regulation in the legislation governing the administrative procedure.Also in 2018, the IP received numerous requests for opinions and positions, which provides them through informal counseling, based on case studies. The above shows that the taxpayers were active and responsive this year. The fact that taxpayers are prepared to cooperate with IP and to follow its recommendations also results from the relatively small proportion of administrative disputes brought against IP decisions. However, the experience of the first year of application of the General Regulation in the field of data protection shows that reform at EU level will require considerable attention in the coming years. Particularly given that Slovenia has not yet transposed the Directive relating to law enforcement agencies and has not adopted any regulations implementing the General Regulation. In practice, this means legal uncertainty for both businesses and other organizations, the exercise of individual rights and the exercise of control. For example, IP does not yet have the possibility of imposing administrative fines under the General Regulation. Through the application of the General Regulation, much greater emphasis has been put on IP work by international cooperation, notably within the newly established European Data Protection Board. It is an EU body with legal personality, made up of representatives of all 28 independent supervisory authorities and the European Data Protection Supervisor. The decisions of the Committee are legally binding on the national authorities. IP is also involved on a daily basis in cross-border element inspection procedures and compliance mechanisms.Reports received by IP in 2018 related to the following suspected violations of the provisions of the General Regulation and PDO-1: unlawful disclosure of personal data : providing personal data to unauthorized users and unlawful publication of personal data, unlawful processing of personal data in the course of direct marketing, unlawful collection or requesting of personal data, unlawful implementation of video surveillance, inappropriate protection of personal data, unlawful access to personal data, processing of personal data contrary to the purpose collection. In 2018, IP received 106 complaints from individuals regarding violations: the right to know their personal information, the right to know their own medical records, and the right to know their medical records from other beneficiaries. The complaints lodged mainly concerned public sector operators (in particular government bodies, municipalities and public institutions), and among private sector operators in particular banks, insurance companies, electronic communications operators and other companies, associations and private healthcare providers. With a view to properly informing taxpayers and effectively fulfilling these obligations, IP has established a number of procedures and prepared materials including: contractual processing guidelines, guidelines on personal data protection impact assessments, guidelines on the transfer of personal data to third countries and international organizations, IP guidelines to create a privacy statement on websites, Guidelines Consumers - to whom we give what personal information and why. New to the past year are infographics that present individual thematic areas in a simple and effective way, despite the fact that these are otherwise complex topics: legal bases for the public sector; legal bases for the private sector with valid consent; and direct marketing. IP aimed at supporting taxpayers at the end of 2018, introduced to the public the European project RAPiD.Si (Raising Awareness on Data Protection and the GDPR in Slovenia), whose main purpose is to educate and raise awareness among small and medium-sized enterprises and individuals about reforming the regulatory framework in the field of protection personal information. The project is co-financed by the European Union. The 2018 section is summarized in the infographic below, and a detailed annual report is available on the IP website.