THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

May 25, 2018

Turning point in data protection
New data protection law: be careful, panic no!

From today, the European General Data Protection Regulation is applicable.
The self-imposed claim of the regulation is high: stronger data protection rights
of the approximately 500 million citizens of the European Union on the one hand. On the other hand, the "free movement of personal data" -
So the data-driven digital industry - in one of the largest economies
the world can not be restricted beyond measure.
The regulation must now prove whether it will exist in this tension. From the first draft of the Commission more than six years ago, to the publication on 4 May 2016, and most recently on the finishing straight to application, a lot has been discussed. Do we really need a unified one?
Data protection law for the whole of Europe? However, a reformed data protection law is important, especially in times of big data and digitization, so that our freedom, itself
to determine about our personal information is not lost.
Basic Data Protection Regulation and Federal Data Protection Act
The European General Data Protection Regulation will directly apply applicable law and
thus largely replaces German data protection law. National regulatory latitude exists only to a limited extent. The new Federal Data Protection Act transposes individual regulatory orders of the ordinance and creates supplementary regulations where opening clauses permit it. It occurs at the same time
Force.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

For example, Data Protection Officer: The Regulation allows for the obligation to designate a Data Protection Officer in national implementing laws for others
To stretch places. The federal legislator has this regulatory latitude in
used the new Federal Data Protection Act to adapt the obligation to designate operational data protection officers to the "status quo" existing in Germany. In the future, Germany will continue to rely on the "Model of Success Data Protection Officer".

Sanctions and advice
In the foreground of the debate are often the fears that violations against
In the future, the regulation can be punished with fines in the millions.
It often goes without saying that the ordinance gave the supervisory authorities a whole "toolbox" in order to be able to adequately remedy any individual case of data protection maladministration. Fines are in it only
one of many possibilities. First and foremost is advice in the future.
The supervisory authorities will also make use of sanctions - but with
proper judgment.
European Data Protection Committee and Data Protection Conference
Uniform law requires intensive coordination in order to ensure a uniform application practice in Europe. The national data protection authorities
will therefore work together in a new format: the European Data Protection Board shall ensure that the interpretation of the law is harmonized throughout Europe. In individual cases, his decisions will be binding. The data protection conference as a common body of all German data protection supervisory authorities will continue to clarify practical interpretation and application questions in Germany regarding the General Data Protection Regulation in the future. An overview of their resolutions and guidance is available here:
https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/dokumente-derdatenschutzkonferenz/
The briefing papers proved particularly helpful - remarks of the data protection conference as in their opinion the regulation in the practical execution
should be applied to particularly practice-relevant topics. From the practice
The short papers Data Protection Officer (No 12), Employee Data Protection (No 14), Video Surveillance (No 15) and, in particular, measures are particularly in demand.

-3-

Plan "DS-GVO" for companies (No 8). The short papers are available here:
https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/ds-gvo/.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
