At Information Commissioner (IP), we see cases where companies do not respond to requests from individuals for access to their own data, even requests from former employees, or completely unjustifiably refuse them. Such conduct is not permissible. However, if it is an employee&#39;s request for payment slips, it may also be a violation of labor law. One of the key elements of ensuring the legitimate processing of personal data is the effective exercise of the right of everyone to become aware of the processing of their own personal data and access to that data (this is laid down in Article 15 of the General Data Protection Regulation). Anyone can ask the company as a customer, customer, subscriber or employee at any time for clarification as to what their personal data is being processed, for what purpose and on what basis, who are the users and information about the retention period. Rejection of the request is only permissible if it is non-individual information or there is a statutory restriction on mediation (eg such restrictions apply to banks for certain information that banks must collect in relation to anti-money laundering and terrorist financing). However, an individual cannot acquire, e.g. the personal data of others, or in certain cases where necessary to protect the rights of others, information that constitutes business secrets or intellectual property of companies (eg, pre-printed and professionally certified psychodiagnostic tests, business logic and algorithms for calculating eg fraud ). The Employment Relationships Act (ZDR-1) specifically stipulates that the employer is obliged to issue a written invoice to the employee by the end of the pay day, showing information on salary, remuneration, reimbursement of work-related expenses and other benefits, payment of taxes and contributions and payday. However, no later than 31 January, the worker must also be issued a written statement of wages and salaries for the previous calendar year, and the labor inspectorate supervises this right. Documents with information on the worker for whom the record of the use of working hours is terminated and documents with information on the worker for which the record on labor costs is terminated are kept as a document of permanent value. This means that the employee may, at any time after the termination of employment, request the transmission of his or her own data. Each company must respond to an individual request within one month of receiving the request. This period may be extended by up to two months for more complex requests or a large number of requests. The company must provide the data free of charge. Only exceptionally can it charge a reasonable fee (administrative costs of intervention): if it proves that the request is manifestly unfounded or excessive (especially since requests are repeated), if an individual requests an additional copy of personal data. In case the company does not respond to the request for assertion under the General Regulation, the individual may turn to IP. IP is paying particular attention to the enforcement of individuals&#39; rights within the European project RAPiD.Si, which aims to educate small businesses on reforming the regulatory framework in the field of personal data protection. More about corporate advice at www.upravljavec.si and individual rights at www.tiodlocas.si.