
Completion of planned supervision at Randers Municipality
Published 05-08-2019
Decision
Public authorities
The Data Inspectorate has made serious criticism that Randers Municipality has not complied with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation in connection with the use of data processors.
Randers Municipality was among the authorities that the Data Inspectorate had selected for supervision in 2018. In particular, the audit focused on the municipalities' compliance with the requirements associated with the use of data processors.
On the basis of the audit, the Data Inspectorate has made serious criticism that Randers Municipality has not complied with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation in connection with the use of data processors, cf. Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3 and Article 5 (2). 2, cf. Article 5 (2). First
Among other things, the Data Inspectorate's final opinion shows that at the time of the audit visit Randers Municipality had not entered into data processing agreements with 68 of the municipality's data processors, where the agreement - as a minimum - contained a description of the obligations mentioned in Article 28 (2). 3. The municipality of Randers, after the inspection visit and before the Danish Data Protection Agency's opinion, stated that the municipality has now entered into data processor agreements with all data processors in accordance with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation.
In addition, the opinion states that although Randers Municipality had continuously monitored the processing of personal data at the municipality's data processors selected for random checks at the inspection visit, the municipality had not in all cases continuously supervised the processing of personal data at the municipality's sub-processors.
You can read the Danish Data Protection Agency's guidance on data controllers and data processors here.
You can read the Danish Data Protection Agency's guidance text on supervision of data processors and sub-processors here.
You can find the Danish Data Protection Agency's standard data processor agreement here.
Decision
The municipality of Randers was among the public authorities selected by the Data Inspectorate in autumn 2018 for supervision under the Data Protection Act [1] and the Data Protection Regulation [2].
The Data Inspectorate's planned supervision of Randers Municipality focused in particular on the municipality's compliance with the requirements relating to the use of data processors.
At the request of the Data Inspectorate, before the audit visit, Randers Municipality sent a list of the data processors the municipality uses. Randers Municipality also sent a copy of all of the municipality's data processing agreements.
The audit visit took place on November 9, 2018.
Based on what the Danish Data Protection Agency has found in connection with the audit visit, the Danish Data Protection Agency finds a basis for concluding:


That the municipality of Randers has in many cases failed to meet the requirements of Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3, including by


that, for 68 of the municipality's data processors, the municipality has not concluded data processing agreements which - at a minimum - describe the obligations mentioned in Article 28 (2) of the regulation. 3


that in some cases the municipality has not sufficiently relied on how the obligations in Article 28 (2) are met. 3, must be fulfilled by the parties in practice,


that the municipality has not sufficiently instructed all data processors in what processing of personal data must be done on behalf of the municipality.



That Randers Municipality has regularly monitored the processing of personal data by the municipality's data processors, which the Data Inspectorate had selected for random checks.


That the municipality of Randers has not in all cases continuously supervised the processing of personal data at the municipality's sub-data processors.


After a review of the case, the Danish Data Protection Agency finds overall grounds for expressing serious criticism that Randers Municipality has not complied with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation in connection with the use of data processors, cf. Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3 and Article 5 (2). 2, cf. Article 5 (1).
The Data Inspectorate must request the municipality of Randers for an account of the data protection considerations made by the municipality on the basis of the audit visit. The report must reach the Data Inspectorate by September 30, 2019 at the latest.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate must request the municipality of Randers to submit a concrete and detailed plan for how the municipality will in future go ahead with the necessary supervision of the municipality's data processors and sub-data processors. The plan is to reach the Data Inspectorate by October 15, 2019 at the latest.
In selecting the sanction, the Data Inspectorate found it attenuating that the municipality should now have entered / updated a large number of data processing agreements (210 agreements) before 25 May 2018, when the Data Protection Regulation was applied, and that the conclusion and negotiation of data processing agreements can generally be a comprehensive and time consuming process.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has found it attenuating that the municipality had a clear overview of where the municipality had failed to enter into data processing agreements and where it was necessary to update the contents of the data processing agreements. At the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate got the impression that the municipality of Randers has in general initiated a number of measures in relation to ensuring compliance with the rules related to the use of data processors, and that the shortcomings found are largely due to the long implementation time of the implemented actions.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate found it attenuating that there were (old) agreements with regard to 28 data processors, which to a certain extent regulated the data processor's processing of personal data, and that after the audit visit the municipality has concluded all relevant data processing agreements.
A more detailed review of the Danish Data Protection Agency's conclusions follows below.
1. Conclusion of data processing agreements, the principle of accountability and the general principles for the processing of personal data
1.1. Relevant rules
Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation 3, it follows that the processing of a data processor must be governed by a contract or other legal document in accordance with EU law or the national law of the Member States which is binding on the data processor with regard to the data controller and which determines the subject matter and duration of the processing, the nature and purpose of the processing, the type of personal data and the categories of data subject as well as the obligations and rights of the data controller. This contract or other legal document shall in particular cover the data processor requirements set out in Article 28 (2) of the Regulation. 3 (a) to (g).
It must, in accordance with Article 28 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3 (a), inter alia a data processor agreement states that the data processor may only process personal data following documented instructions from the data controller, including with regard to the transfer of personal data to a third country or international organization, unless required by EU or national law, such as the data processor; is subject; in this case, the data processor shall inform the data controller of this legal requirement prior to processing, unless the court concerned prohibits such notification for the sake of important societal interests.
Article 29 of the Data Protection Regulation states that the data processor and anyone who performs work for the data controller or data processor and who has access to personal data may only process this information on the instructions of the data controller, unless required by EU law or national law of the Member States. right.
It must, in accordance with Article 28 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. In addition, a data processor agreement states that the data processor must comply with the conditions referred to in Article 28 (3). 2 and 4, to use another data processor (sub-data processor).
Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation 2, it follows that the data processor may not use another data processor (sub-data processor) without the prior specific or general written approval of the data controller. In the case of general written approval, the data processor must notify the data controller of any planned changes regarding the addition or replacement of other data processors, thereby allowing the data controller to object to such changes.
Of Article 28 (2). 4, it follows that if a data processor makes use of another data processor (sub-data processor) in carrying out specific processing activities on behalf of the data controller, that other data processor shall be subject to the same data protection obligations as those provided for in the contract or other legal document between the data controller and the data processor as referred to in paragraph 1. 3, through a contract or other legal document under EU or national law, providing, in particular, the necessary guarantees that they will implement the appropriate technical and organizational measures in such a way as to comply with the requirements of this Regulation. If this other data processor fails to fulfill its data protection obligations, the original data processor remains fully responsible to the data controller for the performance of this second data processor's obligations.
It also follows from Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. Paragraph 1 (a) and (f) that personal data must be processed legally, reasonably and transparently in relation to the data subject and that the data must be processed in a way that ensures adequate security for the personal data concerned, including protection against unauthorized or illegal processing. and against accidental loss, destruction, or damage, using appropriate technical and organizational measures.
In addition, it follows from Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 that the data controller is responsible for and must be able to demonstrate that Article 5 (2) 1, are complied with.
Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation 2, thus contains a principle of accountability which means that the data controller, among other things, shall ensure and demonstrate that personal data is processed for lawful and reasonable purposes and that the information is processed in a manner which ensures adequate security of the personal data concerned - even when the data controller asks another party (a data processor) to process the data on its own behalf.
The data controller must then - in order to fulfill its obligations in the use of data processors - draw up a data processing agreement which regulates the areas mentioned in Article 28 (2). 3, and consider how these obligations must be fulfilled in practice.
The data controller must also - in a sufficiently clear manner - instruct the data processor in the processing of personal data to be carried out on behalf of the data controller. This will in practice mean that the data controller must have an overview of the processing and be able to document what processing activities the data processor is instructed to undertake, including the activities the data controller has approved in relation to any transfers to third countries or international organizations, use of subcomputers etc.
The existence of a sufficiently clear instruction is - in the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency - a prerequisite for the data controller to have an overview and control of the processing when it is entrusted to a data processor, and to be able to determine when a data processor may. acts outside the scope of the agreed instruction.
It is also important that the data controller is aware of whether the agreement states that the data processor also uses the information for its own purposes. If the data controller approves a data processor agreement stating - either the data processor agreement, the main agreement or other agreement terms - that the data processor uses the information for its own purposes, in the opinion of the supervisor there will be a disclosure of personal data which will require a separate disclosure regime in the data protection regime. Chapter 2.
If personal data is disclosed to the data processor, this can advantageously be regulated in a separate supplement to the agreement so that the data processor's processing for his own purposes is not mixed with the processing carried out on behalf of the data controller. Thus, it should be clear when the data processor is subject to instructions from the data controller and when the data processor is independently responsible for the processing of personal data.
1.2. Compliance with the rules of Randers Municipality
1.2.1. Data processing agreements in process or during update
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate asked whether Randers Municipality has entered into valid data processing agreements with all its data processors or whether there are agreements that have not yet been concluded or updated to comply with the minimum requirements in the Data Protection Regulation.
In this connection, the Data Protection Authority pointed out that it appears from the submitted list of data processors that there are 68 - out of about 210 - data processing agreements that are in process or are being updated, including 40 data processing agreements that are in process with and 28 data processor agreements that are being updated in accordance with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation.
The municipality of Randers confirmed that in all 68 cases there are situations where the processing of personal data has begun.
The Municipality of Randers further stated that - in connection with the implementation of the Data Protection Regulation - the municipality has done much to gain an overview of where the municipality lacks contractual data processing agreements and where it is necessary to update the contents of the data processing agreements, but that the municipality as due to the high number of data processing agreements, this was not fully achieved.
In addition, the Municipality of Randers stated that the municipality has had a backlog in relation to old contracts, where suppliers, as part of their services, have processed personal data on behalf of the municipality, but where no data processing agreements have been concluded. In connection with the follow-up to old contracts, the municipality has experienced that it can be difficult subsequently to get suppliers to sign a data processor agreement when the municipality already makes use of the supplier's service.
As a result, the municipality has initiated that the municipality's IT contract manager must review all new contracts in order to ensure that no contracts are signed without a data processor agreement ready for signature if the supplier in question processes personal data on on behalf of the municipality.
By email of May 1, 2019, the Municipality of Randers has stated that the municipality has entered into data processing agreements with the relevant suppliers in accordance with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation. At the same time, the municipality has stated that the lack of data processing agreements - in the municipality's estimation - has not posed an increased security risk.
1.2.2 The procedure for the municipality's approval or objection to the use of new sub-data processors
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate asked more closely about the procedure for the municipality's approval of sub-data processors.
During the review of the specific agreements, the Data Inspectorate therefore asked whether it was agreed how and when the municipality should be notified of planned changes - when the municipality has given a general approval for the use of sub-data processors - including whether the municipality can in fact be able to achieve object to any changes.
On the basis of the municipality's replies, the Data Inspectorate found that in two cases no concrete decision had been taken on how and when the data processor must notify the municipality of such changes.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate noted that - in the opinion of the Authority - it will not comply with the requirements of Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, that a data processor passes the processing or parts of the processing to a sub-processor before the data controller has in fact been able to object to this. The Data Inspectorate further stated that it is the immediate opinion of the Authority that the data controller must be actively notified of changes regarding the addition or replacement of sub-processors.
At the inspection visit, the Municipality of Randers stated that the municipality will in future, in its data processing agreements, be aware of how and when the municipality must be notified of planned changes in relation to the use of sub-data processors.
1.2.3. Documented instruction and data processor's processing of personal data for personal purposes
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate generally asked how the municipality assesses whether a documented instruction is sufficiently clear.
The municipality stated that the municipality has not previously paid the same attention to the design of instructions for the data processor and that the municipality has some work to do to review the content of the data processor agreements in order to assess whether the given instructions are sufficiently clear.
The Data Inspectorate then asked what considerations the municipality has made in relation to the cases where it appears from a data processor agreement that the data processor also uses information for its own purposes, including whether the municipality is aware of this situation.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate stated that the Authority has previously experienced / seen examples of data processor agreements, which show that it is more or less clear that the data processor also uses the information for its own purposes.
The municipality stated that it is always stated in the municipality's data processing agreements that the data processor may only use personal data in accordance with the purposes set out in the agreement, and thus not for its own purposes.
The Data Inspectorate later drew attention to one of the specific data processing agreements and asked whether the municipality has made some considerations in relation to the fact that the data processor uses personal data for its own purposes. In this connection, the Data Inspectorate referred to Annex 3 (instructions) to the agreement, which states that:
“The municipality and the teachers of the municipality must be aware that [data processor] uses selected information for their own purposes. [Data Processor] uses e.g. user behavior information to be able to target the user-oriented dialogue as well as to optimize our products and services. [Data Processor] will therefore process selected information related to newsletters, market and product surveys, and service and product orientations ”.
The municipality of Randers stated that the municipality was not aware of this at the conclusion of the agreement in question and therefore did not act actively on the data processor's use of personal data for his own purposes.
When asked, the municipality stated that they also did not investigate what specific personal data that the data processor uses for their own purposes, and that the municipality has also not ascertained whether a transfer secret exists.
The municipality then confirmed that it is not clear to the municipality when the data processor acts on behalf of the municipality and when they act on their own behalf. The municipality stated that they will follow up on this after the inspection visit.
1.2.4. Overview of the data processor's use of sub-processors
While reviewing two of the specific data processor agreements, the Data Inspectorate found that the data processor agreement did not contain information on whether the data processor used sub-data processors. Against this background, the Data Inspectorate asked whether the municipality was aware in these two cases whether the data processor used sub-data processors.
In relation to both data processing agreements, the Municipality of Randers stated that the municipality had no knowledge of whether the data processors make use of subcomputers, but that this would be regulated in a new data processing agreement which was in the process of the data processor.
In one of the other specific data processor agreements, the data processor's use of sub-processors states that the data controller can find information about sub-data processors, including about the sub-processor's processing of personal data and location, on the data processor's website. Against this background, the Data Inspectorate asked whether the municipality had an overview of how many sub-data processors are used and where in the world personal data is processed.
The municipality of Randers stated that the municipality does not have an overview of this. When asked, the municipality also stated that the municipality has not seen any of the sub-data processing agreements in question and that it is also unclear to the municipality whether the data processor oversees the relevant supervision of the sub-data processors, as the municipality has not followed this up.
1.3. Summary
In relation to paragraph 1, the Data Inspectorate concludes that the municipality of Randers has not complied with Article 28 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. Third
The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized that, as far as 68 of the municipality's data processors are concerned, Randers Municipality has not concluded data processing agreements which - at least - contain a description of the obligations referred to in Article 28 (2). 3, and in several cases have also not sufficiently relied on how the obligations under Article 28 (2) are met. 3, must be fulfilled by the parties in practice.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that - in relation to some of the reviewed data processing agreements - the Municipality of Randers has not sufficiently clearly instructed the data processors in what processing of personal data must be carried out on behalf of the municipality. This was shown by the fact that in two cases the municipality did not have an overview of what they have accepted in relation to the use of sub-data processors. As regards one of the reviewed data processing agreements, the Data Inspectorate also considered that the municipality was not aware that they had accepted the data processor's use of personal data for its own purposes, and that the municipality had not also assessed whether the necessary transfer secret to a such acceptance.
2. Supervision of the processing of personal data by the municipality's data processors
2.1. Relevant rules
Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation Paragraph 1 provides, inter alia, that personal data must be processed legally, reasonably and transparently in relation to the data subject, and that the data must be processed in a way that ensures sufficient security for the personal data concerned, including protection against unauthorized or unlawful data. treatment and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical and organizational measures.
In addition, it follows from Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 that the data controller is responsible for and must be able to demonstrate that Article 5 (2) 1, are complied with.
Article 5 (2) 2, contains a principle of accountability which - in the opinion of the Data Protection Authority - means that the data controller must ensure and be able to demonstrate that personal data is processed for legal and reasonable purposes and that the information is processed in a way that ensures sufficient security for the personal data concerned - also when the data controller asks another party (a data processor or sub-processor) to process the information on its behalf.
Failure to follow up on the processing of personal data by data processors and sub-processors will - in the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency - mean that the data controller cannot ensure or demonstrate the processing's compliance with the general principles for processing personal data, including the processing of data. legal, reasonable and transparent in relation to the data subject ('legality, reasonableness and transparency'), and that the information is processed in a way that ensures sufficient security for the personal data concerned, including protection against unauthorized or illegal processing and against accidental loss, annihilation or damage, using appropriate technical or organizational measures ('integrity and confidentiality').
The data controller must thus supervise (major or minor) compliance with the data processing agreements entered into, including inter alia: that the data processor has implemented the agreed technical and organizational security measures. [3]
2.2. Compliance with the rules of Randers Municipality
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate asked whether the municipality generally supervises the data processors' compliance with the requirements of the data processing agreement, including how often and how supervision is conducted.
The municipality of Randers stated that the municipality consistently demands auditors' declarations that meet the industry standards (eg ISAE 3000 or ISAE 3402) from its data processors. When asked, the municipality also stated that the municipality has not prioritized resources to perform physical supervision of its data processors.
When asked, Randers Municipality stated that the municipality's IT department is responsible for following up on the fact that the municipality actually receives the relevant audit statements from the data processors, and that the IT department has prepared an overview of the status of follow-up on the individual data processing agreements.
In addition, the Municipality of Randers stated that the IT department is actively working on the content of an audit statement and assessing whether it provides adequate information on the security of treatment. When the municipality receives a statement of assurance from a data processor, the statement is recorded in the municipality's record system and a document is attached to the case, where the municipality states its possible comments on this. Randers Municipality presented an example of such a document.
2.2.1. Sampling
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate also carried out a random check to see whether Randers Municipality had obtained audit statements in relation to the processing of personal data from three specific data processors.
On the basis of the random checks, the Data Inspectorate found that Randers Municipality has obtained audit statements from the two specific data processors and that Randers Municipality was able to present documentation for obtaining the audit statements and that the municipality had relied on the contents of these.
In relation to the third concrete data processor, the municipality stated that the data processing had ceased and that the data processing agreement in question was no longer relevant.
2.3. Summary
In relation to paragraph 2, the Data Inspectorate concludes that Randers Municipality has complied with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, cf. First
The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized that the Municipality of Randers could demonstrate that the municipality had supervised the processing of personal data of the municipality's data processors, which the Data Inspectorate had selected for random checks. Thus, the municipality of Randers was able to present documentation for obtaining the audit statements and that the municipality had relied on the contents of these.
3. Supervision of the processing of personal data by the municipality's sub-processors
3.1. Relevant rules
Please refer to point 2.1 of the opinion.
3.2. Compliance with the rules of Randers Municipality
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate also asked whether the municipality generally follows up on whether the processing of any sub-data processors is in accordance with the terms that follow from the municipality's agreement with the data processor.
In this connection, the municipality of Randers stated that it is typically included as a requirement in the municipality's data processor agreements that the data processor is responsible for supervising the relevant sub-processor, but that the municipality randomly checks whether the data processors have actually supervised the sub-processors.
The municipality also stated that the municipality is actively dealing with the content of the audit statements they receive from their data processors. If the municipality has comments on the declarations regarding the subcomputer's compliance with the rules, the data processor makes sure to forward the municipality's comments to the subcomputer.
The Data Inspectorate then reviewed one of the specific data processor agreements, which states that the data processor uses 16 sub-data processors and in this connection asked whether the municipality carries out any supervision of the processing at the specified sub-data processors.
The municipality of Randers stated that the municipality has not supervised the processing of the 16 sub-data processors, but that the municipality expects and has confidence that the data processor in question will control this. After the audit visit, the municipality noted that it is clear from the data processor's audit statement that the data processor regularly monitors the sub-processors, including by obtaining audit statements from them. However, the Data Inspectorate continues to assume that the municipality of Randers has not considered whether the data processor in question has actually supervised the sub-processors, and what the results of these inspections show, if any, about the processing of personal data by the sub-processor.
In reviewing one of the other specific agreements where the municipality did not have an overview of the number of sub-data processors, the municipality stated that it was unclear to the municipality whether the data processor concerned supervises the relevant sub-data processors and that the municipality has not followed up on this.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate asked whether Randers Municipality generally monitors whether the data processor - in accordance with the agreement - has secured the necessary transfer basis in connection with transfers to any sub-data processors in third countries.
In this connection, the Municipality of Randers stated that the municipality - when entering into data processing agreements - is trying to ensure and document that a valid transfer basis is available if, in specific cases, personal data is transferred to third countries. However, the municipality stated at the same time that this has not always been the municipality's practice.
3.3. Summary
In relation to paragraph 3, the Data Inspectorate concludes that Randers Municipality has not complied with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, cf. 1, ved ikke – for så vidt angår enkelte af de gennemgåede databehandleraftaler – at have fulgt op på den behandling af personoplysninger, som finder sted hos de pågældende underdatabehandlere.
Datatilsynet har herved lagt vægt på, at Randers Kommune i to tilfælde ikke har fulgt op på, om databehandleren rent faktisk fører tilsyn hos underdatabehandlerne, og hvad disse tilsyn viser om behandlingen. Randers Kommune har således ikke sikret sig eller kunne påvise disse behandlingers overholdelse af de generelle principper i forordningens artikel 5, stk. First
4. Konklusion
På baggrund af hvad Datatilsynet har konstateret i forbindelse med tilsynsbesøget, finder Datatilsynet grundlag for sammenfattende at konkludere:


At Randers Kommune i mange tilfælde ikke har levet op til kravene i databeskyttelsesforordningens artikel 28, stk. 3, herunder ved



at kommunen for så vidt angår 68 af kommunens databehandlere ikke har indgået databehandleraftaler, der – som et minimum – indeholder en beskrivelse af de forpligtelser, som er nævnt i forordningens artikel 28, stk. 3,


at kommunen i enkelte tilfælde ikke i tilstrækkelig grad har forholdt sig til, hvordan forpligtelserne i artikel 28, stk. 3, skal opfyldes af parterne i praksis,


at kommunen ikke på en tilstrækkelig klar måde har instrueret samtlige databehandlere i, hvilken behandling af personoplysninger, der skal foretages på vegne af kommunen.



At Randers Kommune har ført løbende tilsyn med behandlingen af personoplysninger hos de af kommunens databehandlere, som Datatilsynet havde udvalgt til stikprøvekontrol.


At Randers Kommune ikke i alle tilfælde har ført løbende tilsyn med behandlingen af personoplysninger hos kommunens underdatabehandlere.


Efter en gennemgang af sagen finder Datatilsynet samlet set grundlag for at udtale alvorlig kritik af, at Randers Kommune ikke har efterlevet databeskyttelsesforordningens krav i forbindelse med brugen af databehandlere, jf. databeskyttelsesforordningens artikel 28, stk. 3, og artikel 5, stk. 2, jf. artikel 5, stk.1.
Datatilsynet skal anmode Randers Kommune om en redegørelse for de databeskyttelsesretlige overvejelser, som kommunen har gjort sig på baggrund af tilsynsbesøget. Redegørelsen bedes være Datatilsynet i hænde senest den 30. september 2019.
Datatilsynet skal endelig anmode Randers Kommune om at sende en konkret og detaljeret plan for, hvordan kommunen fremadrettet vil føre det fornødne tilsyn med kommunens databehandlere og underdatabehandlere. Planen bedes være Datatilsynet i hænde senest den 15. oktober 2019.
Ved valget af sanktion har Datatilsynet fundet det formildende, at kommunen skulle nå at have indgået/opdateret et stort antal databehandleraftaler (210 aftaler) inden den 25. maj 2018, hvor databeskyttelsesforordningen fandt anvendelse, og at indgåelse og forhandling af databehandleraftaler generelt kan være en omfattende og tidskrævende proces.
Herudover har Datatilsynet fundet det formildende, at kommunen havde et klart overblik over, hvor kommunen manglede at få indgået databehandleraftaler, og hvor det var nødvendigt at opdatere databehandleraftalernes indhold. Datatilsynet fik på tilsynsbesøget et indtryk af, at Randers Kommune generelt har iværksat en række tiltag i forhold til at sikre efterlevelsen af de regler, der knytter sig til brugen af databehandlere, og at de fundne mangler i høj grad skyldes den lange implementeringstid af de iværksatte tiltag.
Datatilsynet har endelig fundet det formildende, at der for så vidt angår 28 databehandlere forelå (gamle) aftaler, som i et vist omfang regulerede databehandlerens behandling af personoplysninger, og at kommunen efter tilsynsbesøget har fået indgået alle relevante databehandleraftaler.

[1] Lov nr. 502 af 23. maj 2018 om supplerende bestemmelser til forordning om beskyttelse af fysiske personer i forbindelse med behandling af personoplysninger og om fri udveksling af sådanne oplysninger (databeskyttelsesloven).
[2] Europa-Parlamentets og Rådets forordning (EU) 2016/679 af 27. april 2016 om beskyttelse af fysiske personer i forbindelse med behandling af personoplysninger og om fri udveksling af sådanne oplysninger og om ophævelse af direktiv 95/46/EF (generel forordning om databeskyttelse).
[3] Læs mere herom i Datatilsynets vejledende tekst om tilsyn med databehandlere og underdatabehandlere, som kan findes på tilsynets hjemmeside.
