press release
711.402.1

June 27, 2019

Data Protection Adaptation Act - supposed red tape is one
Naive fallacy
The Bundestag plans, in today's last meeting before the summer break, the second
Data Protection Adaptation and Implementation Act EU to adopt. This should be more
as 150 German technical laws to the regulations of the basic data protection regulation (DSGVO) are adapted. The Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information,
Maja Smoltczyk, warns against the extensive and partially dubious draft bill
to be whipped through in the present version.
Among other things, the draft envisages raising the threshold from which companies are obliged
are to appoint a data protection officer. So far, this threshold was 10
Employees entrusted with the processing of personal data. In future, one should
Obligatory appointment only from 20 employees.
Companies often feel left alone to implement data protection regulations.
However, they are not helped to relax the obligation to ensure data protection expertise in the company. Because even without the obligation to order
Data protection officers must fully comply with the complex requirements of the DS-GVO
be implemented. Otherwise, it threatens violations and sanctions. As head of the
Supervisory authority of a start-up metropolis, it is the Berlin Data Protection Commissioner
particular concern that companies are well advised on data protection. Especially
in this area, where artificial intelligence and big data are of increasing importance,
Small companies often process many and highly sensitive data. Will the privacy
Not contemplated from the beginning and constantly monitored, threatening far-reaching
Violations of fundamental rights, but also high material and immaterial damages for the
affected companies. Data protection officers hereby ensure competent legal and
technical advice. They help to prevent breaches in advance and reduce the risk of
Fines and momentous administrative arrangements to keep low. They act as mediators
between the company and the supervisory authority and are the first point of contact in case of breakdowns,
so that you can act quickly and correctly. The under severe lack of resources
Suffering regulators are unable to compensate for this important work. Out
For these reasons, the concept of the company data protection officer, which has a
German specificity, for decades and therefore long before the entry into force of the
DS-GVO proven.
Maja Smoltczyk:
"The proposed regulation suggests a reduction in bureaucracy for small businesses, though
this bill will not work. Without a regulated privacy management and the
Know-how of experts is the implementation of data protection regulations for companies
probably more labor intensive and more expensive. I recommend affected companies and clubs
therefore urgently, even without legal obligation data protection officers continue to
appoint and appropriately equip. "
Responsible: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 0
Fax: 030 2155050
