29.03.2019Bundesverwaltungsgericht: Video surveillance in the reception area of ​​a Brandenburg dental practice not allowed | 03/2019

On Wednesday, March 27, 2019, the Federal Administrative Court ruled on video surveillance in a Brandenburg dental practice. The camera installed there recorded the reception and waiting area accessible to everyone. In real time, she transmitted the events to monitors in the treatment rooms, but without saving the pictures. The country commissioner had given up on the dentist, the camera in such a way that the area accessible to patients and other visitors is no longer recorded. The legality of this order has been confirmed by the Federal Administrative Court in the current appeal procedure.
The Federal Data Protection Court clearly considered that the strict data protection requirements for the need for video surveillance were not met. In particular, there was no evidence to support the dentist's fear that persons could enter their practice to commit a crime. Contrary to what the applicant claims, video surveillance is also not required to provide emergency care for patients who are in the waiting room following an anesthetic injection. Already the lower court had made it clear that milder funds fulfill these purposes as well - for example, the use of additional staff. The Federal Administrative Court was unconvinced that the applicant's flat-rate reference to significantly higher costs in the case of a waiver of a camera. Costs alone can not justify the need for video surveillance.
According to the decision of the Federal Administrative Court, the General Data Protection Regulation applicable since 25 May 2018 does not apply to the order issued by the Land Commissioner before that date. The current judgment is therefore based on § 6b Federal Data Protection Act of the old version. However, the oral argument already made it clear that the need for video surveillance would not exist on the basis of Article 6 (1) (f) of the General Data Protection Regulation. For further details of the reasons, the presence of the written judgment (file reference: BVerwG 6 C 2.18) remains to be seen.


Responsible:
Sven Müller
