Joint press release
Berlin, January 30, 2019

"Privacy goes to school" is entering a new era
Nationwide cooperation of the supervisory authorities supports BvD initiative
The initiative "Data protection goes to school" by the Professional Association of Data Protection Officers of Germany (BvD) e.V. receives on time for the Safer Internet Day (SID) on
Tuesday energetic support. Employees of the data protection supervisory authorities of Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Lower Saxony and Rhineland-Palatinate
offer in February at the schools of their respective state teaching units for
Children and adolescents for the safe handling of personal data on the Internet.
"The cooperation with the four supervisory authorities helps us, many more adolescents
on privacy issues, "said BvD spokesman Rudi Kramer. Surely surfing the net is a basic requirement for young people,
independently and consciously to make their own decisions online.
Stefan Brink, Country Representative for Data Protection and Freedom of Information BadenWürttemberg, coordinates the project on the part of the supervisory authorities. "Children and adolescents are growing up with digital offerings. But that puts them at special risk, "he said. "That's why we care, especially young people
Making people aware of the topic of data protection. We are happy to do this in one
intergovernmental cooperation of the supervisory authorities together with the BvD
implement. "
Brink advertised to the regulators for their involvement. "With the participants
We are in good hands with authorities from Lower Saxony to Bavaria. "Alone in his
House reported more than ten employees for the unusual lessons. "It shows a high level of personal commitment from our privacy professionals," he underlined.
The employees of the supervisory authorities use the BvD material in their lessons
from "Privacy goes to school", its development in content by the
EU initiative klicksafe and financially supported by the DATEV Foundation Future.
For teachers who themselves treat aspects of data protection in the classroom or the
Since November 2018, the 3rd newly revised unit is due to be prepared and followed up
Edition of the teacher's handbook "Privacy goes to school". The materials can
downloaded free of charge at www.bvdnet.de/datenschutz-geht-zur-schule.
The EU initiative klicksafe is organizing Safer Internet Day on 5 February. In this
Year he is under the motto "Together for a better internet" and dedicates himself to Schwer1

point and under the hashtag #lauteralshass against hatred in the net. Since 2004, the
Safer Internet Day on the initiative of the European Commission every second year
Day of the second week of the second month.
All events within the SID 2019 can be found on the Action Day page
at https://www.bvdnet.de/aktionstag-safer-internet-day-2019/

Note for the editors

You are welcome to attend one of the events for your coverage. If interested, we ask for an informal registration.

Contact "Privacy goes to school" of the BvD:
Rudi Kramer, spokesman for the initiative "Privacy goes to school"
Tel: 030/26 36 77 60, E-Mail: rudi.kramer@bvdnet.de
The Professional Association of Data Protection Officers of Germany (BvD) e.V. with 1,600 members promotes and represents the interests of data protection officers in companies and public authorities. The association offers its members competent support in the daily practice of the profession, including extensive training programs.

Contact supervisors
The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information Baden-Württemberg, Dr. med. Stefan Brink,
Königstrasse 10a, 70173 Stuttgart, Tel .: 0711/61 55 41 0, E-Mail: poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de
The President of the Bavarian State Office for Data Protection Supervision, Thomas Kranig, Promenade 27 (Schloss),
91522 Ansbach, Tel .: 0981/53 1300, E-Mail: poststelle@lda.bayern.de
The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information Rhineland-Palatinate, Prof. Dr. med. Dieter Kugelmann, Hintere Bleiche 34, 55116 Mainz, Tel .: 0 6131 / 208-2449, E-Mail: poststelle@datenschutz.rlp.de
The State Commissioner for Data Protection Lower Saxony, Barbara Thiel, Prinzenstraße 5, 30159 Hannover,
Tel .: 0511/120 45 00, E-Mail: pressestelle@lfd.niedersachsen.de

2
