THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

April 8, 2019

Control measures to the EU GDPR have been established

At the presentation of its activity report in January 2019, the State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI), Dr. Ing. Stefan Brink,
already announced: "2019 will be the year of controls". Last year, in
which the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) became effective
the focus of the activities of the privacy advocates clearly on the advice: "We
have in over 200 events more than 20,000 citizens as well
Employees of companies and authorities have been trained, and in thousands of individual cases we have advised and supported them, "explains LfDI Brink. "Now
It is our job to review the success of our work. "Effective data protection not only requires the EU GDPR, it will also apply to all those companies
and authorities have been calling for a long time and with great dedication
concerned about privacy. "Who sets privacy in the 'gap', may from
No advantage over privacy-compliant competition - that's
a requirement of fairness! "emphasizes Brink.
The announcement of controls has not been without resonance, since then the country commissioner has received numerous inquiries from companies, authorities and journalists -
also according to the Freedom of Information Act - achieves which concrete areas in the
Focus of controls stand. To meet this need for information, has
the LfDI now concretises which areas are to be controlled
should.
The total of 250 control measures relate to the areas of public safety,
Transport, Municipal, Health and Education. These include urban and private video surveillance, police data retention, auto-generated data, council information systems, hospitals, doctors' offices and pharmacies, insurance companies and museums. Furthermore, a larger number of websites of online shops on the data transfer to third parties (so-called tracking) are examined.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

Brink: "The controls can be both announced and without special
Announcement happened. In many cases we already have complaints
However, in some cases we also check by sample without any particular reason. "
Important is LfDI Brink nor the following note: "Controls are not synonymous with sanctions or even fines. Also with our extensive measures the advice and the reference to improvement possibilities remain that
Means of choice. Penalties will continue to apply only to serious violations and violations
then pronounced if clear violations of rights are not eliminated. "Equally important:" Volunteer clubs and small companies without major data processing are not the focus of our control action. In this regard, too, we maintain a sense of proportion! "Concludes Brink.
LfDI Brink will report on the results of the control measures in December.
If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
