THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

February 11, 2019

"Keep cool" at the cold Brexit
Brexit or No-Brexit - that's the question!
Although the British House of Commons has spoken out in favor of avoiding the cold Brexit and against a "no-deal exit". Nevertheless, the outcome of the struggle for the Brexit remains completely unclear. The LfDI receives daily inquiries as to whether cross-border data processing - with British business partners or contract processors - remains possible in the event of a cold exit from the EU of the United Kingdom (UK).
This question is answered in the DS-GVO itself: UK would be in the case of the
cold Brexit as a third country - without any transition or grace period. As a legal basis for the transfer of personal data are then
the requirements for non-European international traffic.
The problem is that the scarce remaining time until the end of March 2019 prevents
that all possible solutions offered by the DS-GVO can actually be exploited. A much more favorable adequacy decision by the European Commission will no longer be needed before Brexit. The Commission needs two years rather than two months to do this. long-term
Of course, the LfDI will be open to the initiation of such a procedure
appropriate level of data protection in the UK. This
not only brings more benefits to the practice and saves expenses, but also more
Legal certainty for cross-border data processing in the United Kingdom. Whether the UK data protection regulations meet the requirements of the EU
of course, must be checked consistently in the future. That too will not be
Automatic.
Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

However, other options remain, data processing also at short notice
to perform lawfully. The European supervisory authorities are already preparing this
before: So can breathe corporate groups that already have so-called "Binding Corporate Rules". But also for all other companies a cross-border processing of personal data with the help of so-called
Standard data protection clauses may be possible. Again, though: first check carefully,
whether these model texts fit the concrete processing situation and whether the contracting parties actually fulfill all the requirements listed there. The times
a "simulated" data protection is over, there is the EU-DS-GMO!
The British colleagues provide comprehensive information on all questions about the Brexit: One
General Guideline on No-Deal Brexit can be found on the ICO website.
This is supplemented by a 6-step plan, which is supplemented by a FAQ catalog1
becomes.
In addition, the online tool for creating standard data protection clauses has already been updated to the latest version, the information about the clauses themselves
and their preparation.
Anyone who wants to get more information can do so on the blog of the British
Colleagues do.
Even the most difficult political situations can do so with the help of the DS-GVO
be dealt with. The rest is hoping for a sensible one
Solution ...

If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.

1

additionally https://ico.org.uk/for-organizations/data-protection-and-brexit/information-rights-and-brexitfrequently-asked-questions/
