GZ: DSB-D037.500 / 0036-DSB / 2019 dated 22.3.2019 [Note: Editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammatical and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The DPA decides on the request for information addressed to the DPA by Peter A *** (applicant) dated 8 February 2019 regarding whether or not the petitioner has been sent to the Data Protection Authority has been brought into the administrative proceedings as follows: - It is established that the requested information is not subject to the right to information and therefore the information is not given. Legal basis: Article 20 (3) and (4) of the Federal Constitutional Law - B-VG, BGBl. Nr. 1/1930 as amended; §§ 1 and 4 of the obligation to provide information - AuskPflG, BGBl. Nr. 287/1987 as amended; GROUNDS A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. In an e-mail of 2 February 2019 addressed to the DPA, the applicant informed the DPA that he had made a request for information to a controller and, in the course of which, had received information from a law firm, that the person in charge does not save data of the applicant. The petitioner alleged that the transfer of his data by the controller to the law firm was made without his consent and requested the DPA to prosecute this suspicion under the GDPC. Furthermore, he may be told what rights he has to defend himself against the alleged facts. 2. By e-mail of 8 February 2019, the DPA provided the applicant with an overview of the legal situation applicable in the case in question and referred it to the homepage of the DPA with regard to his rights as a data subject. 3. By e-mail of the same day, the complainant replied to the DPO's notice and said that he had sent an ad in which he reported a suspected administrative offense. In addition, the applicant stated that he now wanted to know whether this suspicion of an administrative offense was received and prosecuted. The inaction of the DPA could violate his rights. If the data protection authority has not acted, he will ask for a notice. 4. The DPA submitted to the applicant by e-mail of 11 February that there was no subjective right to initiate an administrative penalty procedure. In such proceedings, the applicant has no party status and therefore does not receive any information about the course of the proceedings, including the initiation of such proceedings. The applicant was also informed that his attachment could be recorded as a complaint procedure, if he so wished, and that he would be granted all the rights of the parties and the right to be dealt with by the board in such proceedings. 5. The complainant subsequently informed the DPA by e-mail of 7 March that it had asked the DPA to inform it, according to the AuspFG, whether a case allegation procedure had been initiated. He has received no answer or notification so far and asks the DPA to act accordingly. 6. The initiation of a complaint procedure was not requested by the applicant. B. Findings of fact The Data Protection Authority bases its arguments under point A. on its findings of fact. C. From a legal point of view it follows that according to the case law of the Administrative Court, according to § 1 Abs. 1 AuskPflG there is a right to information about the state of the administrative penalty proceedings or if an administrative criminal procedure has been initiated against the person indicated by the applicant and to what result this resulted if the applicant 's interest in obtaining such information outweighs the interest of the persons accused in keeping confidential the question of whether or not an administrative penalty has been initiated against them (see VwGH 30.04.1997, Zl. 95/01 / 0200). In the context of such a weighing of interests, it must be taken into account in particular that the applicant has repeatedly been reminded by the DPA to assert his rights by means of a complaint procedure in which he receives all information on the status of the proceedings and a collusion be entitled to a possible infringement. However, this was not persistently claimed by the applicant. Nor did the applicant bring forward any other reasons for overriding interest and are not aware of them. The mere claim that the applicant could be infringed by the Data Protection Authority's inaction in its rights, which are not specified, was not substantiated by the applicant and, in any event, is not sufficient, also with regard to the possible initiation of appeal proceedings. In the present case, therefore, the petitioner's interest in the requested information can not be established, which would outweigh the interests of the person concerned in his disclosure of the facts as to whether or not an administrative penalty procedure had been initiated against them. It was therefore appropriate to decide.
