
Supervision of IDdesign's processing of personal data
Published 03-06-2019
Decision
Private companies
The Data Inspectorate has notified the police of IDdesign A / S and fined the company a fine of DKK 1.5 million for failure to erase information about approx. 385,000 customers.Journal number 2018-41-0015
Summary
In the fall of 2018, the Data Inspectorate was on an audit visit to IDdesign, where was examined whether the company had set deadlines for deleting customer information and whether the deadlines were met.
Prior to the audit visit, IDdesign had sent an overview of the systems the company uses for processing personal data. IDdesign stated in this connection that in three independent, interacting IDE furniture stores, an older system is still being used, which is otherwise replaced by a newer system in the other stores. During the inspection visit, IDdesign stated that information about approx. 385,000 customers' name, address, phone number, email and purchase history.
IDdesign did not relate to when personal data in the old system is no longer necessary for the purposes for which it is processed, and thus did not specify the deadlines for deleting the personal data processed in the system.
Therefore, the Data Inspectorate finds that IDdesign has not complied with the data protection regulation's deletion requirements, since the company has processed personal data for longer than necessary.
Decision
IDdesign was among the companies selected by the Data Inspectorate in autumn 2018 for supervision under the Data Protection Act [1] and the Data Protection Regulation [2].
The Data Protection Authority's planned supervision of ID design focused in particular on the deletion of personal data in accordance with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e).
At the request of the Data Inspectorate, before the audit visit, IDdesign had completed a questionnaire for each of the systems selected by the Danish Data Protection Agency, which processes personal data, and submitted these together with additional material to the audit. The oversight visit itself took place on October 8, 2018.
Based on what the Danish Data Protection Agency has found in connection with the audit visit, the Danish Data Protection Agency finds a basis for concluding:


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e) (storage restriction), as the company in the system AX 2.5 has processed personal data of about 385,000 customers for a longer period than necessary for the purposes for which they were processed.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation in relation to the information in the AX 2.5 system. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as the company has not established and documented deadlines for the deletion of personal data.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e), as the company in the system AX 2012 has continued to process personal data on customers after the company has set its own deadline for the information.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation in relation to the company's recruitment system and HR system. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as the company has not sufficiently documented its procedures for the deletion of personal data.


In relation to item 1, the Danish Data Protection Agency has today submitted a police report of ID design to East Jutland Police. A copy of the police report is attached for information.
In addition, in relation to items 2-4, the Data Inspectorate finds overall grounds for expressing serious criticism that IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation.
A more detailed review of the Danish Data Protection Agency's conclusions follows below.
Re item 1: Failure to delete personal data in AX 2.5
One of the systems in which IDdesign processes personal data is AX 2.5. The system is an ERP system [3], and it is the predecessor to AX 2012, which is now used by the company. AX 2.5 was phased out from March 21 to July 9, 2015.
In contrast to AX 2.5, IDdesign's current ERP system AX 2012 was one of the 7 systems selected by the Danish Data Protection Agency for review during its audit visit. This was partly due to the fact that IDdesign had informed the Danish Data Protection Agency that IDdesign was a data processor - and not a data controller - with regard to the information in AX 2.5.
After the audit visit, however, IDdesign has informed the Danish Data Protection Agency that the company is responsible for the processing of personal data that takes place in AX 2.5 in connection with lookup in invoices issued to IDdesign's customers in relation to customer cases / complaints and in case of any. questions from the Tax.
In connection with the audit visit, IDdesign informed the Danish Data Protection Agency that the system AX 2.5 processes information about customers' name, address, telephone number, e-mail and purchase history.
When asked about AX 2.5, IDdesign stated during the audit visit that the company has not set deletion deadlines for the personal data stored in AX 2.5 and, moreover, has never erased personal data in the system.
Finally, ID Design has informed the Danish Data Protection Agency that the customer's telephone number is used as a customer ID, and in addition to the telephone number, the customer's name, address, e-mail and purchase history are stored.
IDdesign also stated that at the time of the audit visit, 823,178 “customer IDs” were stored in AX 2.5, and that the oldest personal data originated on April 1, 2010. According to IDdesign, the customer's telephone number is used as the customer ID number. ID, and in addition to the telephone number, the customer's name, address, email and purchase history are stored in connection with the customer ID.
In addition, IDdesign has subsequently reported on the relevant customer IDs in AX 2.5. This shows that 430,100 customer IDs are still processed as a result of the legal obligation under section 10 of the Accounting Act, and that 448 other customer IDs are still processed as customers continue to have an intermediary with ID design.
Finally, IDdesign has stated that the remaining 392,630 customer IDs have been deleted from AX 2.5 during the period from December 12, 2018 to January 31, 2019.
Since it is the customer's phone number used as a customer ID, IDdesign has pointed out that duplicates may occur, which is why the actual number of registrants will be slightly lower.
Since the deletion of the 392,630 customer IDs had already been made when the Data Inspectorate inquired about this, IDdesign could not disclose the exact number of duplicates. However, the company was able to state that among the 430,548 remaining customer IDs, there were 1.48% duplicates, which means that information about 424,192 registered in AX 2.5 is still being processed.
The Data Inspectorate then assumes that among the 392,630 deleted customer IDs, the percentage was the same number of duplicates, ie 1.48%, and therefore the audit concludes that IDdesign retained information about approximately 385,000 former customers' name, address, telephone number, e -mail and purchase history, which is information about an identifiable natural person, cf. the nature of the Data Protection Regulation. 4 pcs. 1, No. 1.
The Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that IDdesign's processing of customer personal data in connection with the approximately 385,000 previous customer IDs does not comply with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4. Paragraph 1 (e) states that personal data must be stored in such a way that it is not possible to identify data subjects for a longer period than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data is processed.
In this connection, it should be noted that IDdesign itself considered that the information should be deleted from the system.
Re item 2: Failure to take a look at and document deletion deadlines in AX 2.5
Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation 2, cf. Article 5 (2). In accordance with paragraph 1 (e), it follows that the data controller must be able to demonstrate that it has not been possible to identify the data subjects for a longer period than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data are processed.
As mentioned, IDdesign has stated that the company has not set deadlines for the deletion of personal data in AX 2.5, nor has it ever erased personal data in the system.
Deciding when the collected and recorded personal data is no longer necessary for the purposes for which it is processed and thus when the information is to be deleted from the systems is the first and most basic step towards establishing correct and functioning procedures for the deletion of personal data.
Therefore, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as IDdesign has not set and documented deadlines for deleting personal data in AX 2.5.
Re point 3: Failure to delete personal data in AX 2012
Prior to the audit visit, IDdesign submitted a completed questionnaire regarding the company's processing of personal data in AX 2012, the new ERP system, which IDdesign implemented in the period 21 March to 9 July 2015 as a replacement for AX 2.5.
The questionnaire states that personal data in AX 2012 is deleted depending on which category they are classified into. As far as the 'Customers' category is concerned, IDdesign has stated that information about the customers who have traded with the company in the form of their sales order, which also shows their customer data.
IDdesign has stated that personal data in the 'Customers' category is anonymized after 912 days, corresponding to the right of claim for 2½ years. IDdesign has also noted that ½ year extended complaint is offered in relation to the Purchasing Act and that there is a 25 year warranty on some products, but that the deadline is set at 2½ years for the purpose of limiting the processed personal data.
When asked about this, IDdesign stated in the questionnaire prior to the audit visit that deletion of personal data in AX 2012, after the specified deletion deadlines, takes place automatically in the system via batch jobs that are run monthly.
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate wanted to investigate whether the deletion deadlines were met in relation to the processing of customer information in AX 2012. To this end, IDdesign stated that the deletion procedures had not yet been implemented at the time of the audit visit, but would be in the following days, why information is available about customers in AX 2012 who had exceeded the deletion period of 912 days.
IDdesign has subsequently stated that the automated deletion procedure was implemented a few days after the audit visit.
The Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that IDdesign - since the company has not complied with the deadlines for deleting personal data on customers that the company itself has determined - has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4. Paragraph 1 (e) states that personal data must be stored in such a way that it is not possible to identify data subjects for a longer period than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data is processed.
In its assessment, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that - based on the fact that personal data was entered into AX 2012 from 9 July 2015 at the latest - this is a relatively short period of a maximum of 275 days, when the information in question - at the time for the oversight visit on October 8, 2018 - had exceeded the deletion deadline of 912 days.
Re point 4: Failure to document follow-up procedures for deletion in the YoungCRM and Timeplan systems
In connection with the inspection visit at IDdesign, the Data Inspectorate has, among other things, reviewed procedures for deleting personal information in the company's recruitment system YoungCRM and the company's HR system Timetable.
Prior to the audit visit, IDdesign stated that deletion in the two systems is done manually based on the deletion deadlines.
During the audit visit, the Data Inspectorate asked IDdesign how the company monitors that the deletions made in the systems have been carried out correctly and as expected.
As far as YoungCRM is concerned, IDdesign has stated that a monthly double check is made on the absence of information that should have been deleted.
Regarding the timetable, IDdesign has stated that a similar double check is performed when deletions have been made in the system.
When asked about this, IDdesign, in relation to both YoungCRM and Timeplan, stated that no written procedures for follow-up on deletion of personal data exist, but that these are fixed processes that must be enrolled in the existing procedures.
In order to fulfill its obligations under Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). In accordance with paragraph 1 (e), the data controller must establish and document procedures for monitoring that the deletion of personal data has been carried out correctly and as expected.
Therefore, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as IDdesign has not documented the company's procedures for following up the deletion of personal data in YoungCRM and Schedule.
conclusion
Based on what the Danish Data Protection Agency has found in connection with the audit visit, the Danish Data Protection Agency finds a basis for concluding:


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e) (storage restriction), as the company in the system AX 2.5 has processed personal data of up to 385,000 customers for a longer period than necessary for the purposes for which they were processed.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation in relation to the information in the AX 2.5 system. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as the company has not set and documented deadlines for the deletion of personal data.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (e), as the company in the system AX 2012 has continued to process personal data on customers after the company has set its own deadline for the information.


That IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation in relation to the company's recruitment system and HR system. 2, cf. Article 5 (2). 1 (e), as the company has not sufficiently documented its procedures for the deletion of personal data.


In relation to item 1, the Danish Data Protection Agency has today submitted a police report of ID design to East Jutland Police.
In addition, in relation to items 2-4, the Data Inspectorate finds overall grounds for expressing serious criticism that IDdesign has not complied with the requirements of the Data Protection Regulation.

[1] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
[2] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[3] An ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system is a system that brings together different processes such as purchasing and inventory management.
