20.08.2019Automatic license plate search: Data Protection Commissioner complains about lack of support by the Police Headquarters Brandenburg | 08/2019

The Brandenburg Data Protection Commissioner today issued a complaint to the Police Headquarters of the State of Brandenburg. Reason is the lack of support of the authority in the context of a data protection examination of the system for automated license plate detection (KESY) - the police headquarters denies the data protection supervisory authority the insight into judicial resolutions and / or public prosecutorial orders.
The trigger for the data protection examination was initially the question of the legality of the transmission of the data collected on the vehicle of a suspect in the missing person case "Rebecca" to the Berlin police. The transfer of the data, so the Brandenburg police, follow the decision of a Berlin district court. With regard to the recording mode of the cameras from which the data originated, the police had initially argued that it would be used on a permanent basis due to a large number of limited, but temporally overlapping court decisions for longer-term observation from across Germany. However, a report by the Ministry of the Interior and the Communal Office, which has since been submitted, shows that there has been a court order in connection with proceedings brought by the public prosecutor's office in Frankfurt (Oder) since 2017. This has been extended to the present and serves as the basis for tag storage in the recording mode.
In this context, on 24 July 2019, the country commissioners carried out an on-the-spot check in the police headquarters and demanded, among other things, an insight into the Berlin decision on data transmission as well as documentation on the arrangement of the observation and the recording mode. The Bureau refused to do so, citing unfounded preliminary proceedings and the lack of consent from the relevant public prosecutor's offices. On 30 July 2019, the DPO requested in writing the Police Presidency to allow her access to the file. A week later, the police also said in writing that they had asked the Berlin Public Prosecutor's Office to decide on this request. Because of the observation decision, she may turn to the prosecutor in Frankfurt (Oder). Dagmar Hartge:

The police of the state of Brandenburg is responsible under data protection law for the implementation of the automated number plate search. Thus, it is legally obliged to assist me in the performance of my duties in the context of an audit. This also includes the issuance of court orders or procuratorial orders contained in police proceedings. By denying its support, the police department impedes full data protection control.

The criminal prosecution powers of the public prosecutor are irrelevant to data protection supervision. In particular, there is no provision that would extend the scope of data protection inspection by police authorities, subject to consultation with the prosecutor. Incidentally, the police headquarters did not specify such a legal basis.
The complaint is accompanied by the recommendation to submit the held resolutions and orders without delay. The Data Protection Officer also calls on the Police Headquarters Brandenburg to issue an opinion with the previously missing information on the legal arguments of the authority. Further statutory competences in case of a refusal to hand over documents are not the responsibility of the Land Commissioners in relation to the police authorities.
The on-site data protection review should also provide information on whether, for example, the distribution of access authorizations or the documentation of logging and data deletions are carried out in a privacy-friendly manner. The Land Commissioner has received all the information on these and other aspects; the evaluation is still ongoing.

Responsible:
Sven Müller
