1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE
To: Avalon Direct Limited

Of: Unit A2 Brooke Court, Handforth Dean, Wilmslow, Cheshire SK9 3ND

i, The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Avalon Direct Limited (“ADL”) with an enforcement notice under section
40 of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The notice is in relation to
a contravention of regulation 21 of the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003.

2. This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

3s ADL, whose registered office is given above (Companies House
Registration Number: 10646254) is the organisation stated in this
notice to have used a public electronic communications service for the
purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing

contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

4. Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct

marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls
®
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone
number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified

a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

2
@

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them

that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The TPS is a limited company
set up by the Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish
to carry out direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for

a fee and receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

The DPA contains enforcement provisions at Part V which are
exercisable by the Commissioner. Those provisions are modified and
extended for the purposes of PECR by Schedule 1 PECR.

Section 40(1)(a) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR)

provides that if the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has
11.

Lee

Lo.

14.

15.

Oo
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
contravened or is contravening any of the requirements of the
Regulations, she may serve him with an Enforcement Notice requiring
him to take within such time as may be specified in the Notice, or to

refrain from taking after such time as may be so specified, such steps

as are so specified.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that ADL has contravened regulation 21 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 1 March 2017 and 20 November 2017, ADL used a public
telecommunications service for the purposes of making 51,917
unsolicited calls to unique numbers for direct marketing purposes to
subscribers where the number allocated to the subscriber in respect of
the called line was a number listed on the register of numbers kept by
the Commissioner in accordance with regulation 26, contrary to
regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these 51,917 unsolicited direct marketing calls were made to
subscribers who had registered with the TPS at least 28 days prior to
receiving the calls, and they had not given their prior consent to ADL to

receive calls.
16.

Les

18.

ro.

Q
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner has considered, as she is required to do under
section 40(2) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR) when
deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice, whether any
contravention has caused or is likely to cause any person damage. The

Commissioner has decided that it is unlikely that actual damage has

been caused in this instance.

In view of the matters referred to above the Commissioner hereby
gives notice that, in exercise of her powers under section 40 of the Act,
she requires that ADL shall within 35 days of the date of this Notice:

Neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public electronic
communications service for the purposes of making
unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where the

called line is that of:

(a) a subscriber who has previously notified ADL that such

calls should not be made on that line; and/or

(b) a subscriber who has registered their number with the
TPS at least 28 days previously and who has not notified
ADL that they do not object to such calls being made.

There is a right of appeal against this Notice to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights), part of the General Regulatory Chamber.

Information about appeals is set out in the attached Annex 1.

Any Notice of Appeal should be sent so that it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date on which this Notice is sent.
Dated the 12" day of April 2019.

 
  

Signe

Stephen Eckersley
Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office
ANNEX 1

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom an Enforcement Notice has been served a right of appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the “Tribunal”) against the

notice.

2, If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a)

D)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that he ought to have exercised his discretion

differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as

could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

a)

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.
7
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.
The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);
b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;
d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;
e) the result that you are seeking;
f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

8
Information Commissioner’s Office

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).