TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Making it Easy Ltd

Unit 7, Erskine House, 1 North Avenue, Clydebank, G81 2DR

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue

Making it Easy Ltd (“MIEL”) with a monetary penalty under section 55A
of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in relation to a

serious contravention of regulations 21 and 24 of the Privacy and

Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

MIEL, whose registered office is given above (companies house
registration number: SC555654), is the organisation stated in this
notice to have used a public electronic communications service for the
purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing

contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct
marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone

number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd
Information Commissioner's Office

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by
Information Commissioner’s Office

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.
Regulation 24 of PECR provides:

“(1) Where a public electronic communications service is used for the
transmission of a communication for direct marketing purposes the
person using, or instigating the use of, the service shall ensure that the

following information is provided with that communication —

(b) in relation to a communication to which regulation 21 (telephone
calls) applies, the particulars mentioned in paragraph (2)(a) and, if the

recipient of the call so requests, those mentioned in paragraph 2(b).
10.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

(2) The particulars referred to in paragraph (1) are -
(a) the name of the person;

(b) either the address of the person or a telephone number on

which he can be reached free of charge.”

“Direct marketing” is defined in section 11(3) of the DPA as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) (Amendment)

Regulations 2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements
of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”
ci.,

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

1CcO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties)(Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

So as to give effect to the Directives.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR .-
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

MIEL is an organisation which promotes itself on its website as a boiler

replacement and repair specialist.

MIEL first came to the attention of the Commissioner when a number
of complaints were identified within a monthly ICO report regarding
direct marketing calls made by an organisation using the name
‘Heating Advice Centre’, or variants thereof. Within those complaints, a

range of calling line identifier numbers (“CLI’s”) were presented.

Enquiries with the communications service provider (“CSP”) for those

CLI’s confirmed that the subscriber was MIEL, and it provided a full list

5
ee

18.

Ls,

8
1C O.
Information Commissioner’s Office
of CLI’s allocated to MIEL. The CSP also provided call volumes and call
detail records (“CDR”) which revealed that the first of the CLIs was
activated on 2 May 2018. The CDR’s also demonstrated that, using the
allocated CLI’s, MIEL attempted over 2 million calls between 2 May

2018 and 12 September 2018.

Compilation of an initial list of complaints at that time showed that
from CLI’s registered to MIEL, there had been 136 complaints to the
TPS, and 52 to the ICO, between May and October 2018.

Out of the total complaints directly attributable to MIEL, no
complainant was able to correctly identify the organisation instigating
the call. The majority of the complainants identified some variation of
‘Heating Advice Centre’, a name not listed as a trading name of MIEL
either with the ICO or the FCA. Many of the complainants referred to
being unable to identify the underlying company despite further

probing.
Examples of complaints are as follows:

"My boiler is not very old Spoke to the manager He couldn't give me the main
office switchboard number, suggested I dial 1471. I have Calling Line ID and
the number on my phone was EE [This is a live number and
ringing it, it is answered in Glasgow, although 0121 is Birmingham] he
couldn't give me a website URL and there is no Website that I can find”

"I cannot find any company details for this number. They claim to be National
Heating Advisory Service,”

“They call themselves the Heating Advice Centre and all speak with Scottish
accent despite the CLI being forwarded being a Swansea STD code....they
give CNN as the number to call them back on which is always
engaged”

"Said calling from National Heating Advisory Centre - I asked for physical
address and the female agent stated based in West George Street, Glasgow”

"Got put through to a manager who confirmed business name but couldnt
give me their phone number because they use various numbers. Got number
from 1471 later”
20.

21:

ZZ.

23:

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

On 14 November 2018 the Commissioner wrote to MIEL setting out her
concerns regarding its compliance with PECR. The letter provided
evidence of the complaints that had been received, and requested
specific information in relation to the calls made, including sources of
data used, trading names used in calls and evidence of any consent

being relied on to make direct marketing calls.

A substantive response was received from MIEL dated 5 December
2018, in which it listed the CLI’s it used and identified the purpose of
each. 10 out of 17 CLI’s listed were confirmed to be utilised for
‘canvassing’ i.e. the initial marketing call. The information provided by
MIEL showed that the CLI’s were geographic to areas where the
marketing was conducted. A call script was also provided which

confirmed MIEL’s use of the name ‘Heating Advice Centre’ in its calls.

MIEL advised the Commissioner that it purchased the data used to
make calls from a third party provider. It later confirmed it did not hold
a contract with its data supplier because it was an ‘if/when purchase’.
MIEL stated that it did not screen its data against the TPS register, nor
could it evidence consent for the calls it made, explaining ‘this would
be from our data company, we would rely on our data company to
have screened the complainants identified in the appendices’ and ‘we
were not aware that any of our numbers were registered with the TPS
as our data company does all the screening’. MIEL did state however

that it held an in-house suppression list.

It was readily apparent to the Commissioner from the response that
there were no arrangements or contracts in place with the third party

data providers at the time of the contravention to ensure the veracity of

the data being purchased.
24.

Zot

26.

2/.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

MIEL informed the Commissioner that it would commence screening
data against the TPS register in future, and went onto explain that it
had been working as an ‘opt in call centre through web’ from
September 2018. Despite this, it was apparent from the
Commissioner’s investigation that as at December 2018, MIEL
continued to make marketing calls, and complaints continued to be
received. MIEL explained this by stating it continued to make calls
during a transitional period whilst the opt-in call centre became fully
operational. The Commissioner has however noted that since her
investigation a further 10 complaints were received during January and
February 2019, and one further complaint in March 2019 which would
indicate that MIEL has not entirely ceased making direct marketing

calls, nor screened its data against the TPS register as promised.

Further detailed analysis of the CDR’s supplied by MIEL confirmed that
between 14 May 2018 and 17 December 2018 1,098,503 connected
calls were made, of which 1,067,293 could be attributed to direct

marketing.

Enquiries of the TPS revealed that of those 1,067,293 marketing calls,
853,769 were to CLI’s that had been registered with the TPS for more

than 28 days. This represented 80% of all marketing calls made.

Further analysis of complaints attributed to calls made to TPS
registered numbers by MIEL during the period 14 May to 17 December
2018 indicated that a total of 144 were made to the TPS and 53 to the
ICO.
28:

29.3

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute
a contravention of regulations 21 & 24 of PECR by MIEL and, if so,

whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The contravention

30.

31.

2.

33%

34.

The Commissioner finds that MIEL contravened regulations 21 & 24 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 14 May 2018 and 17 December 2018 MIEL used a public
telecommunications service for the purpose of making 853,769
unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the
number allocated in respect of the line called was a number listed on
the register of numbers kept by the Commissioner in accordance with

regulation 26, contrary to regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to MIEL to receive calls.

In respect of those calls, the Commissioner is satisfied for the purposes
of regulation 24 that whilst a valid CLI was presented, it did not allow
subscribers to identify the caller, because the company name provided
(as evidenced by the call script) was not a trading name of MIEL, and
despite further probing, vague, false or misleading information was

provided by MIEL to subscribers.

9
35.

36.

Sf

38.

39.

40.

41.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner is satisfied that MIEL was responsible for the

contravention.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because there have been multiple breaches
of regulations 21 & 24 by MIEL’s activities over a 7 month period, and
this led to a significant number of complaints about unsolicited direct
marketing calls to the TPS and the ICO.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met

Deliberate or foreseeable contravention

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate.

The Commissioner considers that in this case MIEL did not deliberately
seek to contravene PECR in that sense, albeit the Commissioner
considers the attempted concealment of the correct company name, as

Supported by its call script, was a deliberate act on the part of MIEL.

The Commissioner has therefore gone on to consider whether the
contraventions identified above were negligent. First, she has
considered whether MIEL knew or ought reasonably to have known that
there was a risk that these contraventions would occur. She is satisfied

10
42.

43.

A4,

45.

@
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office

that this condition is met, given that the issue of unsolicited marketing

calls has been widely publicised by the media as being a problem.

Furthermore, the Commissioner has published detailed guidance for

those carrying out direct marketing explaining their legal obligations

under PECR. This guidance gives clear advice regarding the

requirements of consent for direct marketing and explains the

circumstances under which organisations are able to carry out

marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by post, or by fax.

Specifically, it states that live calls must not be made to subscribers

who have told an organisation that they do not want to receive calls; or

to any number registered with the TPS, unless the subscriber has

specifically consented to receive calls.

MIEL is registered with the ICO which demonstrates some awareness of
its duties under PECR.

Second, the Commissioner considered whether MIEL failed to take

reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

Reasonable steps in these circumstances would have included ensuring
that MIEL could evidence consents relied upon to make marketing calls
where these were based upon purchased data; having in place a
contractual arrangement with any third party data supplier to ensure
that the data being purchased met the required threshold for valid
consent; screening data against the TPS register; ensuring that it had
in place an effective and robust suppression list; correctly identifying
itself as the caller and providing subscribers with an opportunity to opt
out. MIEL failed to take any of these steps and the Commissioner

considers there was no good reason for MIEL’s failure to do so.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that MIEL failed to

take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

11
46.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to impose a monetar enalt

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

ol.

For the reasons explained above the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A(1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that section 55A(3) and the procedural rights under

section 55B have been complied with.

The latter has included issuing a Notice of Intent dated 11 June 2019 in
which the Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. The
Commissioner received confirmation of special delivery by Royal Mail on
12 June 2019. A copy Notice was also emailed to MIEL on 11 June
2019.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty in

this case.

Despite informing MIEL of its entitlement to make representations, the
Commissioner has received no representations in response to the Notice

of Intent, the deadline for receipt of which having passed.

The Commissioner has taken into account the following aggravating

factors:

e Whilst MIEL states that it has operated an ‘opt in call centre
through web’ from September 2018 the Commissioner has
continued to receive complaints from subscribers who are TPS

registered which would suggest that MIEL has continued to make

12
9
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
unsolicited direct marketing calls in contravention of PECR.
Indeed, further investigation revealed that between September
and December 2018 MIEL has made 297,761 calls from its
marketing CLI’s to subscribers whose numbers were registered

with the TPS for more than 28 days. In that time, a further 11

complaints have been received.

e The Commissioner has taken into account MIEL’s use of CLI’s
geographical to the areas being marketed; if the subscriber
believes that it is a local call it increases the likelihood of call

connection.

e MIEL has provided inconsistent and misleading responses to the
Commissioner throughout her investigation, in particular in
relation to marketing calls made prior to May 2018. For instance,
MIEL initially informed the Commissioner that it had no prior CSP,
despite the Commissioner having identified previous complaints
attributable to MIEL, yet later conceded that it did have a prior
CSP through which marketing calls were made. The issue of
complaints about MIEL identified by the Commissioner remains

unanswered.

e The current director’s lack of compliance with PECR, and their
relationship with a currently disqualified director; the director
who resigned in June 2017 is known to the ICO and has also
been the director of at least four companies which have been

found to have PECR-related complaints recorded against them.

e The total lack of any due diligence procedures or screening
conducted on the data, which in the Commissioner’s view go

beyond mere negligence.

52. The Commissioner has also taken into consideration the following

13
53.

54.

55.

56.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

mitigating factor:

e There has been a small reduction in the number of complaints

since the period of the contravention.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making or
instigating of automated marketing calls is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity
to reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

making marketing calls in compliance with PECR.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided that
the appropriate amount of the penalty is £160,000 (One hundred
and sixty thousand pounds).

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 30 August 2019 at the latest. The
monetary penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into
the Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account
at the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by

29 August 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty

14
=e

58.

59.

60.

61.

@
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
by 20% to £128,000 (One hundred and twenty eight thousand

pounds). However, you should be aware that the early payment

discount is not available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

a) the imposition of the monetary penalty

and/or;

b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

the period specified within the notice within which a monetary penalty
must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary penalty has

not been paid;

all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any In
England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In

Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 315* day of July 2019

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a right
of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’)
against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in accordance
with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by the
Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as could
have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the Tribunal will
dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8D]

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the Tribunal
within 28 days of the date of the notice.
Information Commissioner's Office

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it unless the
Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this rule.

4. The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative (if
any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the monetary
penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice of
appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the reason why
the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

5. Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may conduct
his case himself or may be represented by any person whom he may
appoint for that purpose.

6. The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of, and Schedule 6
to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
(General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No.
1976 (L.20)).