On 16 July 2019, the European Data Protection Board published its first annual report. The Brussels-based Committee, of which the Information Commissioner is a member, adopted 26 opinions on the national lists regarding the obligation to carry out data protection impact assessments from May to December 2018, 4 new guidelines on various topics governed by the General Regulation on data protection (on the subject of certification and certification criteria, on exceptions to the transfer of personal data to third countries, on the territorial validity of the General Data Protection Regulation and on the accreditation of certification bodies) and endorsed 16 opinions of its predecessor - Article 29 Working Parties (Working party 29). Within the framework of mandatory cooperation procedures in the field of inspection, 255 cases concerning cross-border cooperation were opened during this period. Most cases stem from individual complaints or complaints (176 cases). However, the remaining 79 cross-border cooperation procedures were opened on the basis of other sources, such as ex officio inspections initiated by the national supervisory authorities, media coverage, etc. The Brussels-based Committee has been set up under the General Data Protection Regulation and has been operating since May 2018 as an independent European body to ensure consistent application of data protection rules in the European Union and to promote cooperation between EU data protection authorities. The Committee is represented by representatives of all 28 independent EU and EEC supervisory authorities (Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein), the European Commission and the European Data Protection Supervisor. The key responsibilities of the Committee in the supervisory authorities&#39; cooperation procedures are: The compliance mechanism, as defined in the General Regulation, is achieved through: The participation of supervisory authorities in (inspection) procedures is via the Internal Market Information System (IMI) of the European Union. Commission; it ensures safe and confidential communication between supervisory authorities and enables the implementation of individual stages and procedures of cross-border cooperation, within the time limits set. The work of the Committee, which meets on a plenary level every month, is conducted in 12 sub-groups of experts. They address different areas of the committee&#39;s work, with representatives from all supervisory authorities. The Annual Report in English is available on the website of the European Data Protection Board: https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/annual-report/edpb-annual-report-2018_en. More information on the functioning of the European Data Protection Board at: https://edpb.europa.eu/edpb_en