To:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Superior Style Home Improvements Limited

49 Bethel Road, Llansamlet, Swansea, SA7 9QL

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Superior Style Home Improvements Limited (“Superior Style”) with a
monetary penalty under section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998
(“DPA”). The penalty is being issued because of a serious contravention
of regulation 21 of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC
Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Superior Style, whose registered office is given above (companies
house registration number:09375551), is the person stated in this
notice to have used a public electronic communications service for the
purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing
contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct

marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls

1
®
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone
number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called
line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”

Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

2
@

IC O.

Information Commissioner's Office
being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(S) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

Under section 55A (1) of the DPA (as amended by PECR 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) the Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty

notice if the Commissioner is satisfied that —
®
IC O @
Information Commissioner's Office
“(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements of the

Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations

2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that
the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

10. The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

11. PECR implemented European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR were amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches the
PECR regulations so as to give effect to the Directives.
12.

13.

14.

Lids

O

1C O OO

Information Commissioner's Office
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR

notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

Superior Style’s business involves, in part, making unsolicited
marketing calls to subscribers in order to generate UPVC installation

leads.

Between 30 May 2017 and 30 April 2018, the ICO received 83
complaints about unsolicited direct marketing calls made by Superior
Style. Of those, 63 complaints were made to the TPS, with a further 20
made direct to the Commissioner. All of these complaints were made

by individual subscribers who were registered with the TPS.

The following are examples of the complaints received by the ICO:

e “Asked is I was Mrs X. Or failing that if I was a householder.
I asked if he wanted to speak to Mrs. N. X and he confirmed
that he did. I pointed out forcefully that N X was my mother
who had been dead for nine years, and his call had really
upset me. He said "sorry" and started to try to interest me in
whatever he was peddling anyway! !!!!!!t!! I asked if he was
really trying to interest me after asking for a dead relative.
He countered "How did I expect his firm to know she was
dead for ten years as the firm had only been going for three
years". I pointed out, forcefully, that his firm was required
to only use up to date records and the number was registered

with the TPS for many years - he wasn’t interested...”
16.

LF

18.

information Commissioner’s Office

e “I’m chronically ill and disabled and was resting on the point
of the call. My landline is unlisted and TPS registered.”

e “When told I was registered with TPS the guy didn't know
what I was talking about! Told him that I didn't want his call
and he seemed confused! Said he'd 'try' to get my number
taken off their system. Told him I was reporting him. Seemed

even more confused! His name was David.”

e “Called offering 'free home improvements’. Told never to call

again and called half an hour later.”

On 29 June 2018, the Commissioner wrote to Superior Style to explain
that she could issue civil monetary penalties up to £500,000 for PECR
breaches. The letter informed Superior Style that the Commissioner
and the TPS had received complaints from individual subscribers in
relation to unsolicited calls. Superior Style was asked a number of

questions about its compliance with PECR.

The Commissioner received a response from Superior Style explaining
that it generates leads via doorstep canvassing as well as by using a
database purchased ‘some time ago’. They had not purchased data
from any third parties for over two years and had not screened the
data they held against the TPS since its purchase, advising that they
removed customer details once they were advised that the customer is
registered with the TPS and do not contact them again.

Superior Style further explained in correspondence that it had been
under the impression that their previous automated telephony provider

would automatically supress calls made to TPS registered numbers.
19.

20.

21.

22.

©

IC O ©

Information Commissioner's Office
They became aware this was not the case after 25 June 2018. They

have no evidence to support this belief and had no contract in place

with its former telephony provider.

Superior Style stated that it purchased the data used from a third
party company in September 2016. That company had purchased the
data on their behalf from “another home improvement organisation”.
The third party has now gone into liquidation and therefore they are
unable to ascertain from where the data was originally sourced or the
consent the use of this data relied on. Superior Style conceded that
they conducted no due diligence when the data was purchased before

using it to make marketing calls.

The Commissioner's investigation revealed that at least 6 separate
CLI’s were being used to make unsolicited marketing calls. Call dialler
records obtained for these numbers show that a total of 849,318 calls
were made by Superior Style within the period of 30 May 2017 to 30
April 2018. This list was filtered to establish the number of calls made
to numbers which were registered with the TPS, at least 28 days
before receiving a call, to show that 518,771 such calls were made.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.
The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of regulation 21 of PECR by Superior Style and, if so,

whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The contravention
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

20.

29.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner finds that Superior Style contravened regulation 21
of PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 30 May 2017 and 30 April 2018, Superior Style used a public
telecommunications service for the purpose of making 83 unsolicited
calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the number
allocated to the subscriber in respect of the line called was a number
listed on the register of numbers kept by the Commissioner in
accordance with regulation 26, contrary to regulation 21(1)(b) of
PECR; and

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to Superior Style to receive calls.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA are met.

Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because there have been multiple breaches
of regulation 21 by Superior Style’s activities over an 11 month period,
and this led to a significant number of complaints about unsolicited
direct marketing calls to the TPS and the Commissioner.

In addition, it is reasonable to suppose that the contravention could
have been far higher because those who went to the trouble to

8
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Information Commissioner’s Office

complain represent only a proportion of those who actually received

calls.

Some complainants allege that Superior Style made repeat calls to
them even though they had requested that their number be supressed.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified
above was deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this means that
Superior Style’s actions which constituted that contravention were
deliberate actions (even if Superior Style did not actually intend
thereby to contravene PECR),.

The Commissioner considers that in this case Superior Style did not

deliberately contravene regulation 21 of PECR in that sense.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contravention

identified above was negligent.

First, she has considered whether Superior Style knew or ought
reasonably to have known that there was a risk that this contravention
would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is met, given that
Superior Style relied heavily on direct marketing due to the nature of
its business, and the fact that the issue of unsolicited calls has been

widely publicised by the media as being a problem.
36.

Sf.

38.

59:

40.

©

1C QO.

Information Commissioner’s Office
Each time a complaint is made to the TPS, the TPS inform the company
complained about. Superior Style would therefore have been aware
that complaints were being made by TPS subscribers which should

have prompted them to take steps to investigate the reasons for this
and to address any deficiencies in their practices.

The number of calls made to TPS registered individuals accounts for
61% of the total call volume, this shows a disregard for the legislation
surrounding the making of marketing calls and suggests that Superior
Style made very little effort to screen the data they were using against
the TPS.

The Commissioner has also published detailed guidance for companies
carrying out marketing explaining their legal requirements under PECR.
This guidance explains the circumstances under which organisations
are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by
post or by fax. Specifically, it states that live calls must not be made to
subscribers who have told an organisation that they do not want to
receive calls; or to any number registered with the TPS, unless the
subscriber has specifically consented to receive calls.

Finally, the Commissioner has gone on to consider whether Superior
Style failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention.
Again, she is satisfied that this condition is met.

Reasonable steps in these circumstances would have included ensuring
that Superior Style could evidence consents relied upon to make
marketing calls; having in place a contractual arrangement with its
third party data supplier to ensure that the data being purchased met
the required threshold for valid consent; screening the data against the

10
41.

42.

43.

Information Commissioner's Office

TPS register and ensuring that it had in place an effective and robust

Suppression list.

In addition Superior Style have, during the course of the
Commissioner's investigation, denied that several of the CLI’s listed in
the complaints were owned by them. This is despite clear evidence to
the contrary including their telephony provider confirming that these
CLI’s were registered to Superior Style, at their business address and
used their e-mail address as a contact. This shows a lack of care and
attention in relation to how the company is operating and suggests
they failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention,
repeatedly failing to acknowledge the contravention when challenged

by the Commissioner.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that Superior Style failed to

take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner's decision to impose a monetary penalty

44.

45.

46,

For the reasons explained above the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A(1)DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that section 55A(3)DPA and the procedural rights under

section 55B have been complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent dated 1 April

2019 in which the Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty. In

11
47.

48.

49.

50.

O

1C O.

Information Commissioner’s Office
reaching her final view, the Commissioner has taken into account
representations made by Superior Style dated 26 April 2019, 10 June
2019 and in other correspondence on this matter, however there is

nothing contained therein to dissuade the Commissioner from her

preliminary view.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case,

The amount of the penalty

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making of
unsolicited direct marketing calls is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity
to reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

telephoning consumers who want to receive these calls.

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that the amount of the penalty is £150,000 (One hundred and fifty
thousand pounds)

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by

BACS transfer or cheque by 4 October 2019 at the latest. The
monetary penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into

12
Sl.

52.

53.

34.

55.

Information Commissioner's Office

the Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account
at the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
2 October 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty
by 20% to £120,000 (One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds). However, you should be aware that the early payment
discount is not available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days
of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary
penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any
variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

13
Information Commissioner's Office

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any
variation of it has expired.

56. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 4"? day of September 2019

 
 
 
 

a
Signed

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

14
ANNEX 1

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1, section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
‘Tribunal’) against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a)

b)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

a)

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

15
O

1C O @

Information Commissioner’s Office
b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it

unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
C) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

16