Access by security authorities
Alexa & Co. is the wrong approach
Not the extension of access, but its limitation
must be placed at the center of the social discussion
become.

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 06.06.2019
Yesterday it was announced that the Conference of Interior Ministers (IMK) intended
Recommended action for accessing digital tracks
to develop so-called smart home applications to existing ones
to dispel constitutional concerns.
While it is welcome when dealing with security agencies
constitutional concerns. In the
But the overall view should not always be about the state
Access to private data.
On the contrary, the discussion of society as a whole would have to be above all
about how to collect and evaluate digital data
can be effectively limited.
The digitization of society is ongoing and at all times
Levels ahead. Step by step, fewer and fewer areas of life remain
in which no digital data about us incurred and used - for
very different purposes and not always in the sense of the human
"Data providers". From the computer via the smartphone to digitized
Household and measuring equipment, continue to voice-controlled
Internet-based wizards like Alexa: behaviors and preferences
even in the most private area are recorded, an end to this development
is not yet approaching in sight. Against this background will
Privacy without effective demarcations to the empty formula.
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release of 06.06.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

Considerations, like all this data (also) from the security authorities
can be used, therefore go in the wrong direction. limit
of data processing and accessibility needs to be the goal
not their extension. Let us discuss it!

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks with the Bavarian
public authorities comply with data protection regulations. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
