×
G
om

×

facebook
×

×
I'M LOOKING FOR
YOU.
Who are you? twitter
Google+
Social Networks & Privacy
Tips for teenagers

×
×

XING
twitter
LO

L

Whatsapp

×

×

Do you have a profile in too?
a social network
like Instagram, SnapChat,
WhatsApp or Facebook?
What do you learn about yourself?
Which information
Do you give a prize?
... do you learn about your hobbies, favorite movies and books?
... your political attitude? ... did you publish photos of yourself? ... are you writing a blog? ... and maybe you will find it
even your contact details, where you are right now or what you are
doing?
Are you in the virtual and seemingly anonymous (online) world
Information that you might even find in real life
conceal your best friends?
What risks and dangers for your personal rights with it
may not be known to you.
We want to use our instructions from a data protection point of view
to educate about potential risks of social networks
you do not get in trouble and your privacy is best
protects.

×

×

The Internet
do not forget anything!

In which network
are you right?

What you find funny today may be really embarrassing tomorrow
or unpleasant. Information that you put on the net is
accessible to all and they can be copied out of control and into others
Relationships are brought. And even if you think about it
you prefer to delete or change your data in the network,
There are special service providers that make this change to your data
Can be detected.

There are social networks for different needs. While
you use the one for private purposes (eg Instagram), you can
make professional contacts (eg Xing) in other networks.
If you just want to keep in touch with friends are messengers
such as Threema, Signal, WhatsApp and SnapChat more suitable. she
are more of a substitute for SMS than social networks, though
since personal data is published (eg profile picture, status).

A separation from school or work and private life or even
a "forgetting" of "youthful sins" you can on the Internet only
then successfully enforce when you nickname on the internet
(Pseudonyms) uses only a few
Initiate (eg your friends)
are known.
The Internet Archive (www.archive.org)
This is the basic rule that you should archive at the te Internet. Of each
Use of social networks beach-covered website are on one
because you have no control, who timeline also earlier versions
available, so maybe your profile viewed persich.
to read personal data, which should nevertheless be deleted.

Pay attention here to end-to-end encryption and who is the one
Service operates. Europe usually has a higher level of data protection.
Also interesting are services, the news after some time
delete automatically - but do not rely 100% on it!



have and do not want to have certain content from you on the net of search engines like google
or Bing are found and displayed, then the "right helps you
to be forgotten ". This fundamental right applies to everyone and relates
refers to the search results for individual persons. For this must
with the operators of the search engines a corresponding request
be put. You should then best support you
looking for experienced experts.

×

It is best to answer the following questions before you find yourself in a social
Network on the Internet:
What do you want to achieve with your profile?
- Keep contacts with friends
- restore lost contacts
- establish new contacts
- Employers alert you
- establish professional contacts
What do you want to use your profile for?
- self-presentation
- Flirt profile
- Application profile
Is the specification of your correct name absolutely necessary?

×

×

Why should you be with yours
Data be careful?

Who else might be interested in your data in the future?

Even though it's easier to get under your real name
you should consider the risks that arise as a result
can that the "community" has this information. Which
Risks can arise as a result, the following examples prove
the press:

- Insurance, z. B. special risks before the conclusion of
Life, disability, health or motor insurance
want to determine.

- Applicants were asked for entries or photos on social networks
not fit in with the attitude of the company or indicate a lack of work ethic rejected.
- Employees terminated due to negative statements about their employer.
- Politically incorrect statements led to the party exclusion or loss of mandate.
- Pupils were abused for insulting comments about their teacher
School directed.

- credit bureaus, creditworthiness,Purchasing power and the sales-relevant behavior (frequent / few callers) want to determine.

×

Phishing mails lure with tricky ones
Justifications to a website that
looks the same as the home page
your bank, your e-mail provider
or your social network and
try so sensitive data from
to get you. If the sender
such mails has information about you
(such as place of residence, music preferences)
or even under the name of one
Friend writes, falls the deception
much easier.

- Data from social networks was used to
Phishing emails or e-mail viruses as real news from
To make friends appear.
- Persons were victims of targeted hate attacks, insults
and slander.

- Landlords, the behavior of apartment applicants (often
Parties, loud music, pets, other unwanted preferences)
want to determine.
- Employers who want to get a more complete picture of the employee or who want to prove that working time has been used privately.
or
- Police and intelligence agencies who could use image data to
Identify people on surveillance videos. Perhaps
There will also soon be an app that profiles the photographed individuals
determined. In addition, you could through random network contacts too
Accused suspected - unpleasant consequences
would be z. B. surveys or house searches.

1. You use social

×

Private Networks:
Use a nickname (pseudonym)!

Some social networks explicitly offer their users a public nickname
occur. Use this privacy-friendly option
to not have to reveal your identity. But also
if the network provider does not provide it: provisions
in the "General Terms and Conditions" which prohibit the use of nicknames, i. d. R. ineffective,
since the operators are obligated according to Art. 5 Abs. 1 Basic Data Protection Ordinance (DS-GVO) for data economy and
only necessary data may be processed.

2. You want social

×

Network can be found:
Give it an extra
Profile on!

Is it exceptionally necessary that you under your real
Names are found, you should have an additional profile
create, the only necessary for locating
Data (eg city or college). Although you can in
restrict the visibility of profile content to many networks, but unfortunately these features are often not bug-free.
Give your "real" name only when you register your
Profiles, if necessary, and remember that the
Operator of the network has access to all the data of your profile.
So look who you trust your data with.

3. You want your private

×

4. You put your profile in

×

publish photos:
Do not put photos in the net,
on which you or others
Persons are recognizable!

social network:
Publish only the
Data that is necessary
and no more!

Think carefully if the photos are really for the public
or whether they are z. B. should be intended only for your friends. can
you may harm the publication? Turn on everyone
Case features that automatically recognize you on photos.
Otherwise you could easily on other photos on the net or even on
Surveillance videos - with your consent - identified
become. Ideally, photos should only be in the network
be set if you
or other people on it
only recognized by friends
Biometric photos can make it possible.
putt, you especially well and fast
on different, different photos
Reason of your distinctive characteristics (eye distance, nose size etc.)
to recognize again.

You should definitely determine the specific purpose that yours
Profile and then think carefully about what data
you want to publish about your person.

×

eye area
(Pupils on
same height)
Nose on the
center line

You also have different roles in everyday life (at school, on
work, private or with friends, in the family etc.) and
Decide who you give which information. In social
Networks can only be distinguished in a limited way. You can
Although entries only accessible to certain "friends"
make, but happen
easy mistake.
Sensor Data: Smartphones and WearabTherefore, you should have a lot of sensors for the under- ones (eg smart watches, bracelets, different social roles as well)
different profiles with the each-equipped, the fitness values ​​and health values ​​(steps taken,
consistently create suitable data.
Pulse, skin resistance) and your Aufberberlege you, which sensor data contained and thus determine your daily smartphone apps social network. Remember that z. B.
receive or even publish resistance and pulse readings
Lie detectors are.
allowed.

×

×

6. Determine who your pro

×5. Keep the control:

fil can see: Limit
the data access!

Give your contact information
not on!

The specification of contact information (eg telephone number,
Mailing address) is not necessary because every network is internal
Contact us. Certainly it is convenient
social networks as an address book to use, however, are
the contact details then publicly available - at least
for all online friends, certainly not all of them real
Friends are. In addition, the data is stored on servers in the
Internet stored for criminal hackers because of
large amounts of data are very lucrative. Some networks
use the contact details also for sending
Advertising. This is for telephone, fax and e-mail advertising
only allowed if expressly to the operator (voluntarily!)
was allowed.
Even some messengers (Threema, Wire) come without
Phone number and without uploading the entire HandyAdressbuches.

For most networks, you can specify which ones
Data in public, d. H. accessible to all users of the network or even to all internet users or just to friends
should be. This setting is usually under
"Privacy / Privacy" or "My Profile". You should always
choose the most restrictive settings. It is especially important
that your "friends list" is not public, because otherwise
also worried about your friends a lot of information about you
can be. You should also not allow that
Unlinked photos or videos of others with your profile or messages to you in a publicly readable
Forum or guestbook can be written. In one
Profile should really only make the information public
which can be safely communicated to any stranger.
Sensor data: Smartphones and wearables (eg smart watches, bracelets, glasses) are meant
with a
Amount of sensors
"Restrictive"
limited.
Your Equipped,
Interests that
your fitness values
Birthdays and tums, health values
your photo albums (traveled
and also your steps,
Pulse, name
Skin resistance)
as well as yours
sincere
should at most
For
and be with it.
deinenEsTagesabechteenthaltsort
Friends accessible
determine
can.
Remember
must run
also
not every one
field
in the pro-that z. B.
skin resistance
and pulse
at
fi l filled
be: data,
the measured values
Not
Lie detectors
are not missible
are, can
need to be.

×

×

×

Criminal hackers use gaps or
Errors in programs to access data over networks that are not actually accessible to them
should - such. For example, your passwords.

×

7. Determine who your profile is

can find in the network:
Limit the data access
to members and close it
for search engines!

In some networks, profile data can only be shared by others
Others offer the exclusion of search engines or the restriction of access to members at least as
Option. If this option is not selected, the profile will later be found not only on Google or Bing, but also in the result lists of specialized person search engines such as yasni.de. Therefore
You should always exclude Internet search engines.
The major search engines offer outdated search results, so
z. Deleted, modified or blocked for search engines entries,
in the result lists to update or remove. Look
to the help pages of the search engines.
In May 2014, the European Court of Justice ruled that
That search engines must also remove links to existing websites if they violate privacy rights and that
Public information law does not outweigh. Also to find hints at the search engine operators.
Indeed
should
Use criminal hackers
Gaps
You always first try the data
on the
Original website
in programs,
to over
or mistake
remove.
Networks to access data that
actually not be accessible to them
should - such. For example, your passwords.

×

×

8. What do you need

really: possible
Applications from third parties
no access to yours
Profile data!

Some network operators allow others to add applications with more or less useful or fun additional features (such as sending hearts to friends or those who are looking for help)
Display of the current weather report). To
Often, your profile data must be used.
It is possible that these applications are more
(unwanted) purposes, similar to a spy or adware,
follow. That could be z. B. the scouting of yours
User data for targeted advertising or political
Be manipulation. You should think carefully about whether and
to what extent you have access to your profile data
einräumst.

×

×

"Restrictive" means restricted.
Spyware is called snooping,
Your task
Interests,
next to their official ones
noyour date of birth,
Photo albums
have other functions,
z. B.deine
files
on and also yours
right name
should be at most for
to spy on your computer
and without
real
be accessible. It
to pass on your knowledge
or friends
also yours
Not every field in the ProVerhalten must be understood in the network.
fi l filled in: data that is not
accessible, can not be abused.

9. You want your data

×

10. You do not want one

protect: be careful
network-wide
Connections!

Social networks or additional service providers offer you
sometimes the possibility that profile data in several
Networks maintained together or in other contexts - eg. On cooperating websites or apps
- be used. Prefer your profile so that the
Data usage outside the actual platform is basically prevented. The login data should always only
be entered on the platform itself. Do you want one
still use such a link, so you should
Just inform who has access to which of your files
receives. Be particularly wary of services that one
Type "home page" to all profiles in social networks
offer, since here the login data of all profiles with pass
become. Data thieves would have access to it in one fell swoop
all your accounts.

×

Trouble with others:
Note the rights of third parties!
A rashly published photo or comment in
A guestbook can quickly put you and others in an uncomfortable situation.
You should always ask for permission before taking a photo,
Publish video or text from or about someone else. This is especially true if the material is linked to information about those (eg photos).
If you do not have a nice, fitting photo for a post
have, then you will find a large selection in free image portals,
such as B. pixabay.com or jugendfotos.de. Here were almost all
Photos provided by the authors for their free use under CC-0 or CC-BY 4.0 license.

×

With Facebook "Connect" you need z. B. on
do not create a new account on a gaming website, but play under your Facebook hacker
use
Gaps
Names and criminals
just can
yours
friends
one or
Fehlersie
in games.
programs,
around the network and against
The problem
plants
on data both
access,
the one that the
Games website
On your
for yours
they are accessible
Pro fi le data
as well as not
on the
be friends
should
- wieFacebook
e.g. deineerfährt,
Passwords.
can access
- and
how
often you play there.

×

×

×

"Restrictive" means restricted.
Spyware is called snooping,
"CC" stands for Creative Commons licenses
Your task
Interests,
next to their official ones
your date of birth is still a worldwide licensing system
tum,
Photo albums
files
on and also yours
have other functions,
z.B.deine
with different legal grading name
should be at most for
to spy on your computer
and without
It should be the free use and Bearechte
be accessible. It
to pass on your knowledge
or friends
also yours
processing of z. As pictures or texts does not allow synonymous every field in ProVerhalten in the network to understand.
union. More infos you fi nd u. a. at:
fi l filled in: data that is not
de.creativecommons.org.
accessible, can not be abused.

×

Why is it interested?
Economy for your data?
Social networks capture the connections of their users
and users, their dating and friendship relationships
among themselves.
From this databases can be created, which are called "social graph"
be designated.
The economic evaluation of these databases is increasingly used by many companies for the development of new business areas.

×
Big Data is the buzzword for analyzing large amounts of data. With techniques
How artificial intelligence is attempted from the data mountain of the operator
social networking to gain useful information. It is Z. Possible,
Advertising specifically targeted
Show people selected by
hundreds of features.

×
Hackers use gaps or mistakes in
Programs to network over
To access data that is not really
should be accessible to them - like
z. For example, your passwords.

Conclusion

×
×
Spyware is called snooping,

besides their official task
have other functions, eg. For example, files
to spy on your computer and
without yours
Wissenduweiterzugeben
or
With Facebook "Connect"
need
z. B. on one
behavior
Trace network.
Game website noneend
new
Accountimanlegen,
rather
play under your Facebook name and you can
just invite your friends and play against them.
The problem now is that the game website both
on your pro fi le data as well as on your friends
can access.

×

Social networks are one
great communicationNSForm
and if you like our 10 tips
Observe, you protect with
simple means your privacy without sacrificing the benefits.

With Facebook "Connect" you need z. B.
on a game website no new
Create account, but play under
your Facebook name and just invite your friends and against them
play.
The problem now is that the game website
both on your profile data and on
which your friends can access.

×

"Restrictive" means restricted.
Your interests, your date of birth, your photo albums and also yours
real name should be at most for
be available to real friends. It
Not every field in the pro fi le must be filled in: data that is not
accessible, can not be abused.

×

You can find more here
Information:
www.datenschutz.de
Common portal of the data protection institutions of the countries and
of the Federation as well as the churches in Germany and some institutions from abroad. Here you will find, among other information, which contact you in which cases of
You must contact Data Misuse.
www.datenschutz-berlin.de
The website of the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information.
www.bfdi.bund.de
The website of the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information.
www.bfdi.bund.de/bfdi_forum
The Privacy Forum. Here you can ask questions about the topic
Data protection provided by other forum members with much
Expert knowledge will be answered. In addition, the Federal Data Protection Commissioner leads her blog here.
www.klicksafe.de
The EU initiative for more security in the network. In the category
"Topics" explains klicksafe the differences between forums,
social networks and Web 2.0 portals like YouTube. Flyer for
Parents and teaching materials for teachers can be downloaded or ordered as a PDF.

×
www.irights.info
The iRights.info initiative has provided legal information for years
Viewpoint and in simple language about copyrights in the digital
World. In cooperation with klicksafe a worth reading was created easily
comprehensive basic article on "copyright and personal rights in social networks".
www.youngdata.de
An information page of the country commissioner for data protection
and the freedom of information Rhineland-Palatinate to self-protection
current Internet services, especially for young people.
www.handysektor.de
Mobile sector is an independent point of contact for the digital
Everyday life - with lots of tips, information and also creative ideas around the use of smartphones, tablets and apps. The
Page is commissioned by the Landesanstalt für Medien NRW and the
Medienpädagogischen Forschungsverbundes Südwest.
www.netzdurchblick.de
Netzdurchblick is an independent and advertising-free internet guide for young people, run by students of HAW Hamburg
is cared for.

×

imprint
Editor:
Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information
Address:
Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin
Office hours:
Mo.- Fr., 10.00 - 15.00
Thu., 10.00 - 18.00
Visitors Entrance:
Puttkamer St. 16 - 18

National program jugendnetz-berlin
Address:
Youth and Family Foundation
of the Land Berlin - Project Office
Obentrautstr. 55
10963 Berlin
Contact:
Telephone: 030 2847019-30
go@jugendnetz-berlin.de

Contact:
Telephone: 030 138890
Fax: 030 2155050
mailbox@datenschutz-berlin.de

Editorial staff:
Oliver Berthold
Speaker at the
Berlin Commissioner
for privacy and
freedom of information

Astrid Dinges
Uta Voigt
music media park e.V.

Layout:
Gabriel Brown
Pressure:
Penguin Printing GmbH, Berlin
12th edition
Total circulation: 40,000
As of July 2018, Berlin

×
Anyone can contact the Berliners
Commissioner for Data Protection and
Freedom of information apply if
he / she feels that at
the processing of personal data has violated data protection rules.

×
The aim of the Berlin state program jugendnetz-berlin is the promotion
of children and adolescents for a self-determined, creative
and responsible use of media, as a prerequisite for
Participation and participation in the digital society.
Develop, network and support in all 12 Berlin districts
Media literacy centers a variety of media education
Offered and model projects. Cooperation partners are u. a. the
Initiative comp @ ss - Computer driving license, bits 21 in fjs e.V. and
WeTeK Berlin gGmbH for the further education of social pedagogical
Professionals and the network of Berlin youth culture centers. Every year the media competence centers organize with other partners
the JugendMedienKulturTage, to try out and creatively design digital media in different genres.
With the Berlin specialist portal - jugendnetz-berlin.de - informed
the country program on topics, issues, projects and
Offers for contemporary media education in Berlin and beyond. The youth portal jup! Berlin offers a lot of information
for youthhe is also a crossmedial created by adolescents
Media magazine and opportunities for digital participation.
The Berlin state program jugendnetz-berlin is funded by the Senate Department for Education, Youth and Family and the Youth and Family Foundation of the State of Berlin and jointly in cooperation
implemented with the Berlin districts.
