press release
Artificial intelligence - and its consequences
On September 17, 2019, the State Commissioners for Data Protection and
freedom of information in Rhineland-Palatinate and Baden-Württemberg in the Ernst-Bloch-Zentrum,
Ludwigshafen an event on "artificial intelligence and the consequences for
Economy, research, work and society ".
Artificial intelligence is one of the most important topics of our time. With this new
Technology that captures not only the digital space, but our entire lifeworld is not only linked to hopes and fantasies, but also to serious fears. Already at the 97th Conference of Independent Data Protection Supervisors
of the Federation and the Länder (DSK) in April 2019 was chaired by Prof. Dr. med.
Kugelmann elaborated the "Hambach Declaration on Artificial Intelligence". The data protection supervisory authorities want to accompany the development of artificial intelligence systems constructively and critically. Science, politics and users are in it
asked to use the associated opportunities in accordance with data protection.
Both the LfDI Rhineland-Palatinate Prof. Dr. med. Kugelmann and the LfDI BadenWürttemberg Brink have been working on the subject of Artificial Intelligence for years as part of their oversight and advisory role. At this event they will
However, leave the word to the invited speakers and their expert opinion. Speakers will be the Enquête Commission "Artificial
Intelligence - Social responsibility and economic, social and environmental
Potentials "of the German Bundestag, ie Ronja Kemmer (CDU / CSU), Saskia Esken
(SPD), dr. Petra Sitte (The Left), dr. Anna Christmann (Alliance 90 / The Greens), the
Expert Lena-Sophie Müller from Initiative D21 and Professor Doris Aschenbrenner from Delft University of Technology (NL). Afterwards, a panel discussion provides an opportunity for questions and speeches from the audience.
We cordially invite you to our event on Tuesday, September 17th at 5pm
in the Ernst Bloch Center. At the subsequent standing reception there is the possibility
to exchange the impressions gained with wine and pretzels.
For our planning we ask for a short advance notice under: kult@lfdi.bwl.de.
The number of seats is limited.
