24.05.2019One year new data protection law - despite start-up difficulties a success! | 06/2019

For exactly one year, Brandenburg has adopted a new, uniform data protection law throughout Europe - the General Data Protection Regulation. Its launch on May 25, 2018, was accompanied by overly high expectations, excited fears and numerous doomsday calls. What has become of it?
After the initial uproar word spreads that names on bell labels are still valid, that children are allowed to write their names in the kindergarten on self-painted pictures and that it is not forbidden to photograph people. The chances of the new data protection law are now more clearly recognizable, after many fears have given way. In just a few months, for example, it has been possible to do what seemed hopeless for a long time: international companies are increasingly looking at European data protection - clearly a win, even for Brandenburg residents.
But it is also clear: A beauty price does not win the data protection basic regulation. Many of their regulations could be clearer, maybe a few less. The European Commission will evaluate the regulatory framework based on initial experience. That the implementation of the new law is sometimes associated with high costs, is beyond question. Even as the data protection supervisory authority, we have clearly felt the extra work connected with the implementation of the new law. Although the State Representative was intensively involved in consultations last year, a variety of new tasks and scarce human resources showed the limits of our capacities.
In the practice of many companies and administrations, there is still a need to catch up in the implementation of technical and organizational measures as well as the documentation and documentation requirements. The fact that small and medium-sized enterprises as well as voluntary organizations in Brandenburg are subject to the same rules as multinational corporations may sometimes be cumbersome in everyday life. However, it ensures that the same level of attention is given to privacy protection everywhere. Demanding the fulfillment of these obligations is not an end in itself: it strengthens citizens' rights and facilitates their enforcement. Dagmar Hartge:
The General Data Protection Regulation does not solve all the problems, but has already brought significant improvements in the first year: strong and enforceable rights for citizens, a significantly increased awareness at all levels, an international signal effect. Even if data protection is tedious - the first track record is impressive. More than ever, people are behind the data and their protection is at stake.

  

Responsible:
Sven Müller
