
Complaint about Lasso X ApS 'processing of information
Published 13-08-2018
Decision
Private companies
The decision states that information obtained from publicly available registers can in principle be published legally. 2018-31-0208
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has processed a complaint that information obtained from the Central Business Register (CVR) is published on the Lassos website www.lasso.dk. The company had refused to respond to an objection from the complainant that the complainant's previous association with a number of companies appears in lasso.dk when searching on the complainant's name.
On August 13, 2018, the Data Inspectorate decided on the case. The Data Inspectorate found that the information obtained from CVR can be published legally. The Data Inspectorate further found that there was no basis for responding to the complainant's objection to the otherwise lawful treatment, since the complainant had not stated reasons relating to his particular situation.
Decision
1. The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case where you have addressed the audit of Lasso X ApS '(hereafter Lasso) processing of information about you.
The Data Inspectorate has understood your request as a complaint that Lasso has refused to respond to your objection that your previous association with a number of companies appears in lasso.dk when searching for your name, [complaints].
After an overall assessment, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is no basis for criticizing Lasso for their failure to comply with your objection.
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
2.1. By emailing […] you have complained that your previous affiliation with a number of companies appears on lasso.dk when searching for your name, [Complaints].
By e-mails of […], Lasso has provided an opinion to use the case, which you commented on by e-mail of […].
2.2. Your comments
You have stated that your previous association with a number of companies should not be searchable solely by a search of your name and that Lasso has no right to disclose your personal information on the Internet. The search results should therefore only be available if you search the individual companies to which you have been affiliated.
2.3. Lasso's remarks
Lasso has stated that the purpose of their service is to enable the public to gain insight into Danish business and all Danish companies, including the leading persons associated with these companies. When searching on lasso.dk, information is retrieved in real time from the CVR register (CVR), and thus this is not information stored at Lasso.
Lasso also states that they do not process personal information about you, caching information only in a temporary transaction when generating a dynamic script-based website. However, if the Data Inspectorate considers that Lasso processes information about you, it is Lasso's opinion that the information is ordinary personal data covered by section 6 of the current Personal Data Act and that the basis for the processing is section 6 (2). 1 (5) and § 6 (1). 1, No. 7.
As a reason why the treatment can take place within this framework, Lasso stated that the information processed in the Lasso service is all information that, according to the Executive Order on the Central Business Register, must be kept in a central register, and that section 18 of the same Executive Order states that anyone can access it because data. Lasso is therefore of the opinion that there can be no consideration in the balancing of interests, which causes it to fall in favor of the data subject. In this assessment it is also included that in the Lasso service no data other than the data publicly available through CVR does not enrich this data and the information is not used in a context other than that already available in CVR.
3. The Authority's decision
3.1. The Personal Data Act is pr. May 25, 2018 was replaced by new data protection rules in the form of a general EU regulation on the protection of personal data applicable in both the private and public sectors [1] and the Data Protection Act [2], which complements the rules of the regulation.
The Data Protection Regulation applies to all processing of personal data which is wholly or partially processed by means of automatic data processing and to other non-automatic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register, in accordance with Article 2 (2) of the Regulation. First
For the purposes of Article 4 (7) of the Data Protection Regulation, a "data controller" means a natural or legal person, public authority, institution or other body which alone or together with others decides for what purposes and aids to be taken processing of personal data.
The processing of ordinary, non-sensitive information must take place if one of the conditions set out in Article 6 (2) of the Regulation is met. 1 (a) to (f) is fulfilled.
Thereafter, treatment may include: This is done if the processing is necessary for the purpose of performing a task in the public interest or which falls under the public authority exercised by the data controller pursuant to Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. (E) or where processing is necessary for the data controller or a third party to pursue a legitimate interest, unless the data subject's interests or fundamental rights and freedoms requiring protection of personal data precede this, in particular if the data subject is a Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. 1, point f.
It is the opinion of the Data Protection Authority - which is also in accordance with the Authority's previous practice under the Personal Data Act - that a (private) data controller within the framework of Article 6 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, point f, which can in principle be legally processed, including collecting, registering, processing and disclosing, personal data obtained from publicly available registers such as CVR.
In accordance with Article 21 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, the data subject is entitled at any time to object to the processing of his personal data based on Article 6 (2) for reasons relating to the particular situation of the person concerned. 1 (e) or (f), including profiling based on these provisions. The data controller may no longer process the personal data unless the data controller proves important legitimate reasons for the processing that takes precedence over the interests, rights and freedoms of the data subject, or the processing is necessary for legal claims to be established, asserted or defended.
3.2. Since Lasso electronically i.a. collects, disseminates, and in some cases processes information in the form of articles [3], the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that Lasso is responsible for the processing of the information about you at lasso.dk and that the processing falls within the scope of the Data Protection Regulation.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate considers that the processing of the information in question about you is lawful, in accordance with Article 6 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. Paragraph 1 (f), including that the information may be sought by searching on your behalf, since Lasso believes that the Supervisory Authority has a legitimate interest in processing information about Danish business, including who are or have been associated with Danish companies, and that this interest precedes your interest in the processing of the information.
The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized that the information is publicly available on cvr.dk and that it is also possible on cvr.dk to seek information about your previous association with a number of companies by searching your name, [Complaints], or by search for "[Complaints] *".
An objection under Article 21 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. However, paragraph 1 may be justified even if the treatment is otherwise legal. This will be the case if important reasons concerning the particular situation of the data subject indicate that the objection must be met.
Since you have not stated reasons relating to your particular situation, but merely stated that the information should not be searchable by a search of your name, which in the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency is a legitimate treatment, the Authority finds that you have not produced any special reasons why your objection should be met.
As your objection is not justified, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is no basis for deciding on the question of deletion (termination) of the relevant search opportunity.
4. Concluding remarks
Lasso is today informed of this decision.
Accordingly, the Data Inspectorate does not take any further action in the case, and, moreover, regrets the long processing time, which is due to a great deal of busyness in the audit.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[2] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
[3] for example: "[Omitted]"
