The rules on the use of cookies and other tracking technologies (such as tracking pixels, device / browser imprinting technologies, etc.) of the Electronic Communications Act stipulate that website operators may use this technology if the individual agrees in advance, then when he has been clearly informed of the controller and the purposes of the processing of this data in accordance with the law governing the protection of personal data. The General Data Protection Regulation requires a higher level of consent to be valid and defines as valid only a voluntary, specific, informed and unequivocal prior consent of the individual. As explained by the new jointly voted and adopted guidelines by the European Data Protection Board on agreeing to these terms, it no longer just satisfies a visit to a website or website. its continued use (eg by scrolling down or scrolling down the web) from which the site manager would assume that the individual is giving consent. The provisions of the General Regulation on consent do not differentiate between different cookies and similar technologies, which are not exceptions, whether they are more invasive or less invasive technologies, such as. own analytics cookies. In the absence of new legislation that would clearly place its analytics cookies among exceptions, which do not require prior consent (the draft ePrivacy Regulation, which otherwise places them as exceptions, is unfortunately still in the process of coordination with the European Council and it is not clear when will be accepted), the Information Commissioner joins those leading supervisory authorities in the EU [1], [2] who have changed the policy of using their own analytics cookies on their websites in recent days. They either removed their own analytics cookies or only installed them with the prior consent of the individual, and began updating their cookie guidelines and similar technologies. Even though only a minority of supervisory authorities have used this stricter criterion so far, the Information Commissioner is currently removing Matomo&#39;s own analytics cookies from its website. We emphasize that this is an IP decision and does not currently represent a standard to be followed by other managers who use their own analytics in accordance with the issued IP guidelines. In the coming months, the Information Commissioner will follow the practices and positions of the leading supervisory authorities in the EU or. EDPB and updated its Website Cookie Guidelines and FAQs on cookies and related technologies in the light of developments; however, following the publication of the updated guidelines, we envisage the introduction of an adjustment period, similar to other EU supervisory authorities, in which website operators will be able to adapt their operations to those parts of the guidelines that may be modified in the future, in particular those regarding the presumed consent. [1] ICO Updated Guidelines on 03/07/2019: https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/guide-to-pecr/guidance-on-the-use-of-cookies-and-similar- technologies-1-0.pdf [2] Communication from the French Supervisory Authority (CNIL): https://www.cnil.fr/en/legal-framework-relating-consent-has-evolved-and-so-does-website- cnil