&quot;Data protection is not a privilege but a bulwark of consumers&#39; ingenuity&quot; Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Giovanni Rossi, &quot;QN&quot;, 23 October 2019) &quot;The sentence of the Grande Chambre de Strasbourg on the hidden video-espionage of workers, referring to the single case of huge thefts in a supermarket of the Spanish large-scale retail trade, does not open up the way for the undifferentiated and systematic collection of the personal data of employees: much less on the basis of suspected suspects or events proportionate to the choice of such an invasive instrument &quot;. Antonello Soro, 71 years old The next 26 November, from 2012 at the head of the Authority for the protection of personal data, warns the Italian corporate world from prominent emulative temptations inspired by the media&#39;s resonance of the provision. After the uproar of the sentence, do you fear a proliferation of hidden cameras in the workplace? And shouldn&#39;t the Guarantor, in the event, give his preventive authorization? &quot;The defensive control of companies, admitted by the Workers&#39; Statute, does not escape the principles of proportionality and adequacy that inspire the Privacy Code. The Strasbourg ruling is not a &#39;free all&#39;. Reaffirms on the contrary that the protection of personal data it cannot be easily compressed &quot;. High principles but reality works on the lower floors: we could witness the drift of trailing video controls from time to time instrumentally motivated. &quot;I respond with facts. The business owner who spied on employees in the bathroom on the basis of alleged security reasons is now under an order precisely because of violation of privacy and of the principle of proportionality and not excess of the measures. In cases of suspicion for serious crimes - see for example the theme of mistreatment of minds in kindergartens or in facilities for the elderly - direct action by the corporate authority is never advisable. The report to the police is preferable &quot;. Doesn&#39;t the fascination of the business world with the technology control function of workers betray the failure of the same corporate organization? &quot;If the worker&#39;s efficiency and production quality are left to the mechanical asseveration of the presence or to sophisticated algorithmic evaluations, in both cases it is the human factor of the company that diminishes. What role do managers have in assessing employees and objectives, if everything depends on the machines? The temptation of an absolute delegation to the data system leads inevitably to the &#39;Chinese syndrome&#39; &quot;. Be more explicit. &quot;In China, the use of biometric data and electronic control of every citizen&#39;s action is now an accepted fact. The result is a kind of &#39;point life&#39;, a precondition of social ascent and even subsidized credit. an illiberal and non-democratic culture. We Italians, we Europeans, should be better off from this temptation &quot;. Do citizens understand the value of their personal data? &quot;The prevailing narrative tends to consider privacy an almost anachronistic privilege in the era of maximum interpenetration between man and technology. Instead the protection of our data and our digital identity is the necessary bastion to the invasiveness of the new tools and above all to naivety of consumers &quot;. See the entry digital butlers like Amazon Alexa, Apple Home Pod, Google Home. &quot;The voice assistants represent one of the most important issues regarding existing risks. One above all: giving one&#39;s life, minute by minute, to the patent holders. Who knows where the news will end that a family member discovers a serious illness. or a data center that may not be able to get it? Or rather to an insurance company that for the worse will profile the customer asking for higher premiums or, in the future, refusing the policy? &quot;. Health and taxation, sensitive data can hurt here. &quot;We are definitely entering the era of electronic health records. If the individual health record is not adequately protected, it will be vulnerable. And if it were vulnerable it would become accessible to data receivers or manipulators. Because if a hacker modifies my blood group from Zeropositive in Zeronegativo, at the first admission I die, I don&#39;t know if it&#39;s clear &quot;. Even the tax authorities now have our data. To find evaders? &quot;Algorithms measure the deviations of spending and savings of the tax payers compared to the declared, but the infinity of case studies with potential risk - even errors of the Administration - cannot leave aside a human evaluation. And here we return to the reasoning of before. officials deploy the Revenue Agency to exploit this immense amount of data? The State should indeed be interested in whether we hold BTPs or shares, or how much money we spend to live, not if we buy this or that item traced with electronic invoicing &quot;. Our personal data is scattered around servers around the world. With what safeguards? &quot;In the public sector, the first protection is represented by a robust IT and organizational perimeter of the database. The second by an IT register of accesses. The third by encrypted transmission processes. Even in the private sector the same policies apply. practice does not always coincide &quot;. There is not only the problem of hackers, but also that of digital monopolies. &quot;Unfortunately, yes. But anyone who wants to recover all their personal data at least today can do so. According to the new European regulation anyone can write to Google - obviously it&#39;s just an example - and request a copy of their historical chronology or its deletion, or still transfer to another subject. It is a very new right, technically complex but already exercisable &quot;. How to teach it to citizens? &quot;For the new generations digital education at school in parallel with civic education. Then a strong alliance between school and family, because digital is a new dimension of life. The digital identity of children must be protected. You cannot put a smartphone in the hands of a child without explaining to him what doors he opens and what risks it exposes him &quot;.