GZ: DSB-D123.848 / 0001-DSB / 2019 dated 22.1.2019 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The data protection authority decides on the data protection complaint of Bertram A *** (complainant) dated 3 December 2018 against the district court N *** (Respondent) for breach of secrecy as a result, submission of proof of income as follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: Articles 55 and 77 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR), OJ C. No. L 119 of 4.5.2016, p. 1; § 1 of the Data Protection Act - DSB, BGBl. I Nr. 165/1999 as amended; §§ 83 ff. Of the Judicial Organization Act - GOG, RGBl. No. 217/1896 as amended; §§ 101 f of the Exceptions Act - AußenStrG, BGBl. I Nr. 111/2003 as amended. EXPLANATORY STATEMENT A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. In his complaint, the complainant alleges, accompanied by a letter of formal notice (§ 17 AußenStrG) and the minutes of 27 November 2018 concerning an application for increase in maintenance payments, both of which are GZ 1 * Pu * 26 / 18b of the respondent, a violation in his fundamental right to secrecy. The respondent had handed over to the complainant's proof of income for the last 1.5 years to Mrs Herta A *** on the basis of her request to recalculate the alimony payments to the complainant's two daughters. 2. The Respondent states in its comments of 27 December 2018 that the data processing was carried out as part of the judicial activity and that there was no competence of the Data Protection Authority. A substantive opinion on the complaint was not. B. From a legal point of view, it follows: 1. On judicial activity Under Article 55 (3) of the GDPR, the supervisory authorities are not competent to supervise the processing carried out by courts in the context of their judicial activity. According to ErwGr. 20 of the GDPR, this serves the independence of the judiciary in the performance of its judicial functions, including its decision-making. Supervision of data processing operations should be entrusted to specific bodies in the Member States' judicial system. The GDPR itself does not expressly state which judicial activity constitutes a judicial activity. According to a well-established literature, matters which have to be dealt with in the context of instruction-bound administration of justice do not fall under the term "judicial activity" (for more details see Schmidl in Gantschacher / Jelinek / Schmidl / Spanberger, Commentary on the General Data Protection Ordinance1 [2017] Art. 55 Note 3; Nguyen in Gola (ed.), General Data Protection Regulation [2017] Art. 55, para. 13; Selmayr in Ehmann / Selmayr (ed.), DS-GVO [2017] Art. 55, par. , In order to clarify the concept of judicial activity, the case law of the ECJ on Article 267 TFEU may also be used as a guide. Even if the wording of Article 267 TFEU does not refer to a judicial activity, there is nevertheless an inseparable connection between an admissible court and a judicial activity. It is apparent from that case-law that not all judicial activity authorizes the reference for a preliminary ruling. For example, the ECJ dismissed the requests for a preliminary ruling from two Austrian courts in their capacity as commercial register courts on the ground that those courts had no case to settle, but acted as the leading commercial authorities (see the decision of 22 January 2002 , C-447/00, and the judgment of 15 January 2002, C-182/00). According to the case - law of the Data Protection Authority, a judicial activity in the context of judicial activity occurs when a judge is in the exercise of judicial office or a judge or public prosecutor is otherwise instructed to take care of the delegated duties (see the decision of 16 October 2018, DC DSB-D123.461 / 0004-DSB / 2018). On the basis of the above, the decisive element for answering the question whether a judicial activity exists is the existence of a dispute between at least two parties, in which the court, as a neutral body, has to take a decision of a judicial nature. On the other hand, it is not decisive whether, from a procedural point of view, this procedure is a disputed or non-contentious procedure. 2. The substance of the case The present case concerns Herta A's application of 27 November 2018 for a recalculation of the maintenance payments made to the complainant's daughters, which was recorded by the respondent and, in the course of which, the complainant's proof of income should have been handed out. This matter is procedurally subject to the Foreigners Act. The general provisions of the Foreign Excise Act (I. Main Section) indicate that proceedings under the Foreign Criminal Procedure Act are generally multi-party proceedings (§ 2 of the External Criminal Procedure Act) and proceedings are in principle initiated upon request by a party (§§ 8 et seq. The court seised must, of its own motion, ensure the continuation of the procedure and arrange it so as to ensure an exhaustive discussion and thorough assessment of the subject-matter of the proceedings and the shortest possible duration of the procedure. The parties have to support the court in doing so (§ 13 AussStrG). If necessary, the court also has to order oral proceedings (§ 18 of the Foreign Criminal Procedure Act). The court seised decides by resolution (§§ 36 ff. AussStrG), which can be challenged by appeal (§§ 45 ff AussStrG). The special provisions for maintenance disputes can be found in §§ 101 et seq. Of the External Incremental Act, in which, however, no procedural deviations are normalized (unlike, for example, in the sections on adult protection and probate proceedings). It follows that a maintenance proceeding, even if it is procedurally governed by the 'AußenStrG', is a procedure intended to settle a dispute and seeks a decision of a judicial nature. The respondent thus acted as part of a judicial activity. The DPA is therefore not competent to deal with the complaint pursuant to Art. 55 (3) GDPR. The legal protection for alleged violations of the right of confidentiality by a court in the context of judicial activity is governed by §§ 83 ff GOG. It was therefore to decide according to the claim.
