
Complain about lack of encryption
Published 02-07-2019
Decision
Private companies
In a specific case of encryption of e-mails, Lowell Danmark A / S had made a risk assessment, where the procedure was assessed as an appropriate security measure by the Data Inspectorate. Journal number: 2019-31-1263
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has dealt with a complaint in which a citizen has complained that Lowell Danmark A / S has sent confidential information about the citizen unencrypted over the Internet.
On 26 June 2019, the Data Inspectorate decided on the case. In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, Lowell Danmark A / S 'processing of the information about the citizen was in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
The decision should be seen as a concrete justified example that a data controller can use an opportunistic TLS 1.2 encryption (encryption on the transport layer that only works if the recipient's server supports it) when transmitting confidential information over the Internet if the data controller relies on a risk assessment has correctly assessed that such a setup constitutes an appropriate security measure.
In the specific case, Lowell Danmark A / S had emphasized, among other things, that only a few of their recipients make use of very old e-mail client versions or service providers, where an e-mail will be sent unencrypted, and that they specifically assess this for the individual recipients. The e-mails that the case is about were also sent encrypted on the transport layer for complaints.
According to the information in the case, the Data Inspectorate had no basis for overriding the risk assessment made by Lowell Danmark A / S, and assumed that the technical and organizational measures in the situation were appropriate. In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, Lowell Danmark A / S had thus implemented appropriate security measures in accordance with Article 32 of the Data Protection Regulation based on a risk assessment.
Decision
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case where, on January 5, 2019 and January 19, 2019, X has complained to the Danish Data Protection Agency on Lowell Danmark A / S 'processing of information about it. Initially, the Data Inspectorate must note that the supervision of this decision has not decided whether Lowell Danmark A / S has consented to communicate with X over e-mails, since Chapter II of the Data Protection Regulation [1] does not require the data controller's method choice in communication with data subjects, including whether the communication should be by physical mail or digital.
1. Decision
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that Lowell Danmark A / S 'processing of X's personal data has been in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. The circumstances of the case
It appears from the case that on January 5, 2019 and January 19, 2019, Lowell Danmark A / S sent information on arrears due to X's e-mail. It is also apparent from the case that Lowell Danmark A / S has used a - so-called - TLS 1.2 encryption (encryption on the transport layer) based on the algorithm AES256 when sending these emails and that this was done with the setting called opportunistic ( which sends mails encrypted during transport to the recipient if supported, but unencrypted if not supported).
3. Comments of the parties
3.1. Your comments
X states that on January 5, 2019 and January 19, 2019, Lowell Denmark sent X's due arrears information to his email (email address) via an unencrypted connection. X also states that he does not believe that he has given permission for Lowell Danmark A / S to contact him via e-mail.
3.2. Lowell Danmark A / S comments
Lowell Danmark A / S has denied that the two emails were sent via an unencrypted connection.
Lowell Danmark A / S submits that the forwarding of the e-mails in question was in accordance with the risk assessment carried out by the company in accordance with Article 32 of the Data Protection Regulation. The company emphasized in this connection that case numbers are used in the e-mails concerned. emails, and that these are an expression of a pseudonymization of personal data and that the risk of the information coming to unknowingly is low. The company has also emphasized that e-mails are only sent to debtors who have actively approved the use of e-mails for communication with Lowell Danmark A / S. In the assessment, Lowell Danmark A / S has emphasized that in general, only a very small number of their recipients use very old e-mail client versions or service providers, where an e-mail will be sent unencrypted, assesses this for individual recipients.
Lowell Danmark A / S has stated that all e-mails sent from the company - as a minimum - are sent with Opportunistic Transport Layer Security (TLS) 1.2 using all the latest cipher suites that Office365 supports. The cipher suite used for sending the said emails to X has been "TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384". It has also been noted by the company that X's email domain supported Opportunistic TLS.
Lowell Danmark A / S has finally stated that the sending of the two e-mails was based on the fact that X - in connection with a telephone bailiff meeting on that DATE. MONTH YEAR - orally has given permission for this and that the company has not registered any kind of inquiry from X where he has refused this request form. Lowell Danmark A / S has also stated that X has now been unsubscribed from this service, as it is the company's opinion that the company no longer wishes to be registered with this data.
4. Rules of law
Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation Paragraph 1 states that, taking into account the current technical level, the cost of implementation and the nature of the processing, the scope, the context and the purpose, as well as the risks of varying probability and seriousness of the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the data controller undertakes appropriate technical and organizational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to these risks.
The provision of Article 32 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, the data controller has an obligation to protect both sensitive information and confidential and ordinary non-sensitive information, and the data controller must ensure that the data controller's systems, organization and workflows are organized in such a way that the requirements of Article 32 (1) apply. 1, is complied with.
In the opinion of the Data Protection Authority, it would normally be an appropriate security measure - for both public and private players - to use encryption when transmitting confidential and sensitive personal data over the Internet.
5. Decision
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that Lowell Danmark A / S 'processing of X's personal data was done in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation [2]. 1. The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized the fact that Lowell Danmark A / S stated that a risk assessment was carried out, where the concrete approach was deemed to be appropriate assurance that opportunistic TLS was used in the transmissions of the e-mails concerned. 1.2 encryption based on AES256, that X's e-mail client supported this encryption form and that the 2 e-mails sent have been encrypted on the transport layer.
The Data Inspectorate notes that the audit generally - when dealing with email with sensitive and / or confidential information - encourages the data controller to set up his mail server for enforced TLS (Forced TLS), as a minimum in version 1.2. However, in the opinion of the Authority - not in itself - it is contrary to Article 32 of the Data Protection Regulation to use an opportunistic TLS, if the data controller, based on a risk assessment - correctly - has considered that such a configuration constitutes an appropriate security measure.
In the specific case, the Data Inspectorate has not found any evidence that could override the risk assessment conducted by Lowell Damnark A / S in relation to the use of encryption form.
However, in the specific case, the Data Inspectorate must emphasize that a risk assessment cannot be based on what the data subject may have authorized himself, since such acceptance cannot be equated with the appropriate level of security.
6. Concluding remarks
Lowell Danmark A / S is informed of this decision today.
The Data Inspectorate hereby considers the case to be closed and thereafter does not proceed further in the case.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[2] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
