PRESS RELEASE

February 14, 2019

Students develop privacy solutions

How can users of apps and Internet services be made more sensitive to privacy and supported with tools? This question went
Students of the degree program Business Informatics, who presented the solutions they developed at the end of their course.
Already for the second time, students of a course of program director Prof. Dr. med. Tobias Straub in depth with questions from the field
of privacy. They continued the cooperation with the authority of the State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI) BadenWürttemberg, which began in 2017. In a total of eight teams, students developed applications that serve to raise awareness, provide training, enable self-data protection and support companies in implementing data protection regulations.
Thanks to the intensive support provided by the long-standing assistant lecturer Michael
Schlegel mastered the often tricky challenges and developed technically sophisticated software solutions. Under the guidance of
Lecturers Ivana Marevic as a Scrum expert, they also learned modern
Know and apply agile development and project management methods.
At the beginning of February, the project groups presented their findings in the presence of Martina Strifler as a representative of the LfDI authority. All groups could participate with
A convincing solution, so that this time the jury was the choice of the best team difficult. Finally, two groups were awarded:
Leon Ambaum, Matthias Aupperle, Franziska Brendel and Hendrik Kappler demonstrated with their browser extension how users manage the overview
can keep track of what personal information they provide to websites
to transfer. The novel add-on "Giracy" allows it in a simple way, the
legal rights of the data subject, for example, to information or deletion of
To perceive data.
Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

Maximilian Busic, Birk Schweppe and David Stürner realized so-called "skills"
for Amazon's voice assistant Alexa. With the help of a smart speaker, the
Can accept language commands, users can be informed on the one hand on the legal requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation. A not very seriously meant second skill sensitizes for the problem of the
Data processing in the Amazon cloud itself.
A video of the interaction with Alexa and detailed descriptions of all
Works can be found at:
https://studium.dhbw-stuttgart.de/winf/studierendenprojekte/privacy-by-dhbw/

v.l.n.r .: Ivana Marevic, Tobias Straub, Matthias Aupperle, David Stürner, Birk
Schweppe, Franziska Brendel, Hendrik Kappler, Leon Ambaum, Martina Strifler, Michael Schlegel
If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
