Against digital totalitarianism, a EU-China Privacy Shield is needed. The Soro Guarantor speaks Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Michele Pierri, &quot;Formiche&quot;, 15 May 2019) In China there is a convergence of elements - massive data collection, diffusion in the world of infrastructures (even 5G) on advantageous conditions and investments in emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence - which represents &quot;an extraordinary criticality in the international scenario&quot;, currently undervalued. A scenario that combines with platforms coming from the East that increasingly enter the European and global consumer market, with respect to which &quot;citizens are really defenseless&quot;, because there is no such agreement as the Privacy Shield between the EU and the US, which forces western platforms to take EU law into account. The highlight is Antonello Soro, president of the authority for the protection of personal data. In an exclusive interview with Formiche.net, a few days after the expiry of the mandate, the Privacy Guarantor summarizes his seven-year term and some of the most important events with which he was confronted, from the Snowden and Cambridge Analytica cases, passing through the advent of the Gdpr until the recent controversy over the measures against the Rousseau platform. With a common thread: the impetuous technological change taking place and the risks that may arise. President Soro, while the technological clash between the US and China is raging, in his last annual report by Garante Privacy you emphasized new dangers from Beijing. Which? Platforms arriving from the East are increasingly entering the European and global consumer market. Compared to these platforms, citizens are really defenseless, because there is no agreement as in the past was the Safe Harbor and, above all, today is the Privacy Shield between the EU and the United States, which obliges Western platforms to take EU law into account. In the case of China, on the other hand, there are no similar framework agreements and therefore similar guarantee frames. Of course, the introduction of adequate safeguards in a system as peculiar as the Chinese one is somewhat more complex than it is in the US case. This is an issue we must absolutely reflect on. China is also often cited in relation to security concerns arising for companies such as Huawei and Zte, of which you spoke not only in the Report, but also in a hearing of the Copasir. The Chinese case is worrying precisely for this reason: a structural convergence between the data collection made by the providers and that made by the State for reasons of national security. The control that comes out of it is pervasive control, which could also affect European citizens. In China, many decisive factors are focused on the future of humanity. Beijing has a wealth of data collected and processed already enormous view of its population. He invested a lot of resources in this sector, setting up an impressive artificial intelligence market. They have acquired advanced skills in the construction of infrastructures, and in particular of 5G, which they offer throughout the world on advantageous terms. The combination of these factors represents an extraordinary criticality in the international scenario. But it does not seem to me that today it has an adequate place on the Western political agenda. Always on the subject of a drift of surveillance, you have recently requested stricter rules for the use of computer probes, the so-called trojans. Why? I would like to be clear: I have never questioned either the interception in itself or the use of the technological tool to implement them, which I believe is right and proper above all for certain types of crime, primarily terrorism and organized crime. If anything, I have questioned the methods. A critical issue to take into account is the outsourcing of important segments of interception procedures, in particular when they are made with cutting-edge technologies. This makes the chain of investigative activity somewhat more complex and vulnerable, especially in the case of the use of invasive technologies such as spy software placed on platforms accessible to all and not inoculated directly into the suspect&#39;s device. The Exodus experience teaches it, but it is not the only one. This is why I believe that an instrument, such as that of the Trojan, capable of carrying out a plurality of investigative operations, often even hindering the reconstruction of the activities performed, requires further guarantees. We asked for it in the opinion phase on the Orlando reform and we ask it again: stronger protections are needed, in the face of such invasive and constantly evolving technologies. the freedom and needs to ascertain the crimes must be able to be conjugated in respect of the canon of proportionality. We are witnessing a series of cyber attacks. One also concerned the Guarantor and in particular the former treatment register. A few days earlier Roman lawyers and some telcos had been hit. What is this escalation due to? There is no absolutely and by definition invulnerable system, not even ours. Even the Pentagon has been attacked. Cyber attacks are in a dizzying growth phase around the world. And we know that the protective measures implemented in the public and private sectors are generally inadequate. The problem is taking responsibility for it, especially at a time when all the hostile relations between states and within states are taking place in the digital dimension. Protecting IT assets is an inescapable condition to compete or simply for the proper performance of the economy and institutions. Offenses also occur offline. But while in the material reality we have police garrisons and a culture stratified over the centuries, in the fifth domain we still lack the right attention, but also sufficient safeguards. Is it true also in the case of the Rousseau platform, which you have fined? Or, as the pentastellatos note, is it a political dossier? Beyond the political controversies, which leave the time they find, we have adopted two measures with times if possible longer than the usual ones. We did it precisely because, being a platform in which forms of democratic participation are exercised, we have wished to adhere to the utmost caution. And, beyond the public statements, we adopted a provision that was evidently deemed to be founded, since no opposition was presented. Adjustments to that structure were and are necessary for the function it performs. Indeed, it does not represent a mere collector of generic information but, I repeat, a space in which democratic participation is exercised. The European elections are approaching and it is a few days ago the news of new pages closed by Facebook. In these years has the collaboration of the so-called Over-The-Tops on propaganda and fake news cases grown? Surely there is a change not only formal, but substantial in the attitude of the platforms we use, mostly American. It did not depend, however, on a repentance, as, I believe, from the awareness that for any company - even minor ones - the effective defense of information assets will become a competitive advantage and a reputational factor. Added to this are some important changes. One, as already mentioned, is that of user sensitivity. The other regards, however, the law and, in particular, the innovations contained in the new European Regulation for the protection of personal data, the Gdpr, to whose draft the coordinating body of the European guarantors has provided a valuable contribution. By now around 120 countries in the world have adopted or are adopting disciplines similar to the European one. It means that this type of approach cannot be overlooked or ignored. What kind of seven was his? The Authority has been and will continue to be a window on the changes taking place in the world. In recent years we have encountered so many episodes that have generated debates and have produced a non-marginal change in the awareness of citizens: from the revelations of Snowden who had lit a beacon on the activities of security agencies, to end with the Cambridge Analytica case with the profiling of mass of users. Both cases have served to promote, at a global level, a moment of reflection. With a significant difference. Which? While in the first case the question was perceived as important but distant, that is concerning only some subjects subjected to control in determined hypotheses, in the second it was acknowledged that digital surveillance is a problem that interests - even if in a different way - almost all humans around the planet. Thus there has been a general awareness, which we consider an important goal even if we still have to do so much.