Results of the 96th Conference of the
independent data protection supervisory authorities of the federal and state governments
on 7./8. November 2018 in Münster
Stop E-Evidence-Regulation!
Protect data subjects, do not aggravate data retention.
Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 08.11.2018

The conference of independent federal data protection supervisory authorities
and the Länder (Data Protection Conference) appeals to all those involved in the legislative process to stop the EU Commission's proposal for an E-Evidence Regulation.
With its proposal for an E-Evidence Regulation, the EU Commission wants to create an alternative to the formal legal assistance procedure and to the
Investigation authorities faster access to communication data
enable. The law enforcement authorities of the EU Member States are to
Authorization to provide telecommunications and Internet services providers in other EU Member States and also in non-EU countries
the EU (third countries) directly for the release of stock, access,
Obligate transaction and content data.
Then, companies based in Germany could be responsible for the publication of
Data required to investigate authorities in other EU Member States
although the persecuted crime in Germany is not an offense at all.
This could, for example, be a termination of pregnancy allowed in Germany or a political expression of opinion if it is punishable in the requesting state. It is also to be feared that third countries will be the ones
The EU as a blueprint for its own regulations.
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release from 08.11.2018 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

The persons concerned are entitled, if at all, only to a legal remedy in the requesting member state, but their legal system is generally alien to them
is.
The problem of the so-called "data retention" of telecommunications data is exacerbated when foreign law enforcement agencies have direct access to such information.
The resolution is available here:
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de/dsbk-ent/DSK_96-E-Evidence.html

Guidance on the processing of personal data for
Purposes of direct mail
With the Basic Data Protection Regulation, the previous data protection regulations for direct advertising have been dropped. The Privacy Conference provides guidance on how to understand the Privacy Directive for direct mail.
The orientation guide is available here:
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de/dsbk-ent/DSK_96-Werbung.pdf

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks with the Bavarian
public authorities comply with data protection regulations. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.

The Privacy Conference consists of the Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the
Federal and states. The 96th conference took place in Münster on 7 and 8 November. Of the
The Chairmanship, which alternates annually, organizes and represents the sessions of the Privacy Conference
Conference to the outside. In 2018, the country commissioner for data protection and freedom of information
North Rhine-Westphalia chaired.
