
Complaint about TDC's registration of traffic and location data
Published 11-02-2019
Decision
Private companies
On the basis of a complaint about registration of traffic and location data, the Data Inspectorate expresses serious criticism that TDC's processing of personal data does not comply with the principle of data minimization. 2018-31-0070
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case where [the complainant] on 22 August 2016 complained to the Data Inspectorate about TDC A / S '(hereafter TDC) processing of personal data about him in connection with TDC's registration of traffic and location data when the complainant's mobile phone is accessed. the Internet.
1. Decision
After a review of the case and after the matter has been examined at a meeting of the Data Council, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is a basis for serious criticism that TDC's processing of personal data on complaints did not comply with Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation, PCS. 1 (c).
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
It is apparent from the case that TDC has continuously registered information about complaints, including which mobile masters the complainant's mobile phone has connected to through Internet communication. Complaints had become aware of these registrations on the basis of an objection request, which TDC answered on September 24, 2015.
From the material received in connection with the insight, it can be seen that over a period of 10 months TDC made 11,366 logs of location data for mobile data traffic. During the same period, 185 MMS CDR information was recorded.
On the basis of the above, on 9 and 11 February 2016 complaints complained to the Danish Commerce Agency and complained about TDC's registration of traffic and location data for mobile data traffic.
In a reply to the Danish Business Authority on April 1, 2016, TDC explained in more detail the relevant registration of traffic and location data. The report shows, among other things, following:
“The basis for billing data for use in MMS (CDR) is formed in the part of the mobile network called MMSC (MMS center). This data string contains, inter alia, a timestamp but not cell ID registration (mast locations).
In order to get location (cell ID) associated with a specific MMS, TDC will need to collect location information from the traffic nodes in the so-called PS network. MMS is transported as data in the PS network where it is not possible to distinguish between one and the other type of IP traffic. Therefore, the location for all mobile data traffic is collected.
Only by merging the MMS timestamp that is recorded and stored in the settlement CDR with the corresponding [timestamp] in the collected mobile data data from the traffic nodes can the MMS location data be separated.
TDC does not conduct further data processing of location data and thus the interconnection of MMS CDR and location data for mobile data until TDC receives a request from the police to provide MMS location information or when an end customer requests insight into the customer's own data according to the Personal Data Act. Only during this interconnection of data is a match formed between the individual MMS and the collecting location.
It should be noted that TDC deletes location data when it is no longer relevant to store, cf. In doing so, TDC ensures that TDC can continue to store billing data for MMS following the [Bookkeeping Act] (ie longer than one year), while location data is not stored longer than the logging order attributes. If location was collected as part of settlement CDR, TDC would not be able to delete location data from settlement CDR until TDC could [delete] the settlement basis under the Accounting Act.
It should also be noted that TDC does not collect cell ID for all the masts [that] a customer uses in connection with the use of mobile data (including MMS). TDC only collects records of the cells that are used at the time when different state shifts occur, for example, if the customer has reached a specific volume limit, session start, session end when a data session has lasted an hour, or when changing radio technology (2G, 3G and 4G). This is why [complainant] on his data extract may find some periodic records. This also means that the cell ID registration for an MMS does not necessarily correspond exactly to the cell to which the customer was connected when the MMS was sent, but the cell TDC has last registered used in connection with the customer's use of mobile data communication. "
After initially - at the request of the Data Inspectorate - having awaited the Danish Business Authority's treatment of his complaint, on April 5, 2017, the complaints directed a new request to the Danish Data Protection Agency. had informed him that the board did not consider him to be a party to the board's case against TDC.
On 24 May 2017, the Danish Business Authority made a decision in the case against TDC and found in this connection that TDC's registration and storage of location data regarding mobile data traffic did not contravene section 23 (2). 1, of Executive Order No. 715 of 23 June 2011 on the provision of electronic communications networks and services (the contract notice).
The Danish Business Authority's decision states, inter alia, by letter of 12 November 2015 to the Danish Commerce and Industry Agency stated that if the telecommunication providers must separate the location data for MMS communication from other mobile data, the sorting must be done before the collection of CDR files. The telecommunications industry has further stated that there are no equipment or techniques available to the providers today and that such sorting will therefore require IT development. It is the telecommunications industry's loosely estimated estimate that such a change will cost a double-digit million for the industry overall and that it will probably take approx. one year to implement such a solution.
Subsequently, the complainant has again gained insight into his personal data at TDC.
From the material received, it appears that during the period June 12, 2017 - June 11, 2018, TDC made 22,219 logs of location data on mobile data traffic. During the same period, 20 MMS CDR information was recorded.
2.1. Complainant's comments
Overall, complaints have stated that TDC records more information than is necessary to comply with TDC's obligation under section 4 (6) of the Order on Logging.
In this connection, the complainant states that it is only 1.6% of the registered information that TDC is obliged to register in accordance with section 4 (6) of the Order on Logging. In addition, the complainant has stated that his location is in several cases registered over a hundred times a day without sending or receiving MMS on those days.
Finally, complaints have referred to TDC being able to continuously interconnect MMS CDR information and mobile data traffic, so that TDC only stores mobile data traffic related to MMS communication.
2.2. TDC's remarks
TDC has stated that it is stated in the instructions to section 1 of the Logging Order that telecommunications providers are only required to register and collect information on telecommunications traffic generated or processed in the provider's network, and that TDC is thus not required to develop special systems in order to provide relevant data that is not already processed in TDC's mobile network.
TDC has further stated that the Minister of Justice, when issuing the logging order, was aware that meeting the requirement for logging of location data by MMS communication would result in logging of location data for all mobile data traffic. In this connection, TDC has referred the Telecommunications Industry's opinion to the Ministry of Justice in connection with the making of the logging order. The Ministry of Justice's consultation note of June 18, 2004, pp. 34-35 states:
“In many other cases, however, the requirements of the draft order cast doubt on the practical scope of the requirements for a specific service. For example, the guidance gives the impression that location data (section 2 (1) (6) of the Executive Order) must be registered in connection with communication via GPRS and in connection with the exchange of MMS. However, location data is not recorded in connection with said communications in most mobile networks. This is because the services in question are based on open logic channels that are physically activated as long as the terminal is turned on. The transport network is constantly updated as the customer switches between cells, but this information is only used for a dynamic update of routing data. Therefore, there is no need or need for logging of location information for each communication. In cases where GPRS is used for, for example, messages at a higher level in relation to the mobile service - possibly. via an email provider independent of the mobile service provider - there will be no registration of the communication in the mobile network except the [quantifications] of the volume consumption used for volume estimation. If location data is to be recorded in connection with MMS and communication via GPRS in general, this can only be done by logging all cell information related to the logical channel used as a carrier and a subsequent temporal matching of these records with generated records for communication . This will be an extremely extensive task and will involve logging of the customer's behavior independent of communications to and from the person concerned. "
In addition, TDC states that the company has investigated whether the technical development of the mobile networks since the issuance of the logging order has made it possible to register location data for MMS communication without registering location data for all mobile data traffic. However, this has not proved to be the case.
TDC further notes that continuous interconnection of location data for mobile data traffic and traffic data for MMS - in the company's opinion - will result in a compromise of the data base which forms the basis for the location information provided to the police. Thus, TDC will not be able to review raw data with a desire for data validation in order to document that the information is valid as raw data is no longer available. Therefore, in TDC's opinion, it is necessary for TDC to store location data for all mobile data traffic in order to be able to provide valid location data for MMS communication after the logging order.
By letter of 28 September 2018, TDC has stated that the MMS logging in question is solely based on TDC's flexibility and responsiveness to the Ministry of Justice's request, and that TDC has no independent interest in that logging.
Finally, by letter of November 7, 2018, TDC has stated that TDC has canceled the logging of all location data for mobile data traffic and that all previously collected data has been deleted.
3. Competence of the Data Inspectorate
According to section 27 (1) of the Data Protection Act. 1, the Data Inspectorate oversees compliance with the general data protection rules contained in the Data Protection Regulation [1] and the Data Protection Act [2].
Supervision of rules on the processing of personal data that have not been replaced by special rules in, e.g. the telecommunications legislation, thus lies with the Data Inspectorate.
When examining the contract notice, it is immediately only the provision in section 23 (1). 5, which contains content which gives rise to considerations on the relationship with the principle of data minimization in Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. The contract notice is worded as follows:
§ 23. Providers of public electronic communications networks or services must ensure that traffic data, cf. Paragraph 1 (2) concerning subscribers or users is deleted or anonymized when they are no longer necessary for the transmission of the communication, cf. 2-5 and section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, or rules issued pursuant thereto.
PCS. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1. 1, a provider, as mentioned in subsection (1), must 1, process and store traffic data for the purpose of charging subscribers and billing for interconnection. Such processing and retention of data is permitted until the expiry of the statutory limitation period for the relevant debt obligations and settlements.
PCS. 3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1. 1, a provider, as mentioned in subsection (1), must 1, process traffic data, cf. 1 (2), regarding subscribers or users for the purpose of marketing electronic communication services or providing additional services, cf. 1 (4), provided that the subscriber or user has given his consent prior to the processing. The treatment is only allowed to the extent and length of time required by the service or marketing. The subscriber or user must be able to withdraw his consent at any time.
PCS. 4. Providers, as mentioned in paragraph 1. 1 shall notify the subscriber or user of the types of traffic data being processed for the purposes of paragraph 1. 2 and 3 and the duration of treatment. In the case of treatment for the purposes of paragraph 1. The purposes referred to in paragraph 3 must be notified before consent is obtained.
PCS. 5. Providers, as mentioned in subsection (1). 1 shall ensure that the processing of traffic data as referred to in paragraph 1. 1-4 is only carried out by persons employed or acting on the authority of providers of public electronic communications networks or services, who are engaged in debiting or traffic management, processing complaints or other inquiries from subscribers, fraud detection or marketing of the provider's own services or the provision of additional services. In dealing with such specific cases, the processing of traffic data must be limited to only what is necessary for the processing of the case.
The provision thus contains in paragraph 1. 5, last sentence, a principle of data minimization, which, however, only concerns situations where employees, etc. in telecommunications providers deal with specific cases, including complaints, detection of fraud etc., where the processing of traffic data in such specific cases must be limited to only what is necessary for the processing of the case.
Thus, section 23 of the contract notice is not considered to contain a general principle of data minimization, which is why the provision does not - in accordance with the principle of lex specialis - precede Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (c).
Against this background, it is the Authority's assessment that the Authority has competence to address the question of whether TDC's processing of traffic and location data is in accordance with the basic principle of data minimization in Article 5 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (c).
4. Recording location data on complaints
4.1. Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation
The processing of personal data must always be in accordance with the basic principles of Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation.
This means, inter alia, that personal data must be sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed ("data minimization"), in accordance with Article 5 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (c).
4.2. Logging Order
Ministry of Justice Order 988 of September 28, 2006 as amended by Executive Order No. 660 of June 19, 2014 on providers of electronic communications networks and electronic communications services registration and retention of information on telecommunications (the "Logging Order") regulates the collection and storage of information on telecommunications with a view to using the information as part of the investigation and prosecution of criminal offenses.
Section 1 of the Order on Logging states that providers of electronic communications networks or services to end users must register and store information on telecommunications generated or processed in the provider's network, so that this information can be used as part of investigation and prosecution of criminal matters .
Section 4 of the Order on Logging states:
“An end-user of electronic communications networks or services for end users must record the following information on landline and mobile telephony as well as SMS, EMS and MMS communication:
1) calling number (A number) and the name and address of the subscriber or registered user,
2) called number (B number) and the name and address of the subscriber or registered user,
3) changing the dialed number (C number) as well as the name and address of the subscriber or registered user;
4) acknowledgment of receipt of messages;
5) the identity of the communication equipment used (IMSI and IMEI numbers);
6) the cell (s) to which a mobile phone is connected at the start and end of the communication, as well as the precise geographical or physical location of the respective masters at the time of communication;
7) the time of commencement and termination of communication and
8) the time of first activation of anonymous services (talk time cards).
By clause 6 of the general comments on Act No. 378 of June 6, 2002, whereby the provision in section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, was inserted. following:
"The proposed provision in section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. Paragraph 4 (1), cf. section 2 (3) of the bill and the administrative regulations that are laid down in accordance with the proposed provisions in section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, second paragraph, and par. 5, could have certain negative economic and administrative consequences for business and citizens. "
From the Minister of Justice's answer of 2 February 2012 to Question No 12 regarding the proposed law amending the Law on amendments to the Criminal Code, the Administration of Justice Act, the Competition and Consumer Relations Act, the Arms Act, the Extradition Act and the Offenders Act, Finland, Iceland , Norway and Sweden. (Amendment of the audit provision) (L 53) from the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs states the following about the financial consequences of the Order on Logging:
“The Order on Logging was issued pursuant to section 786 (2) of the Danish Civil Procedure Act. 4, according to which it is incumbent on providers of telecommunications networks or telecommunications services to undertake registration and storage for one year of information on telecommunications traffic for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting criminal matters.
The provision in section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, was inserted by Act No. 378 of June 6, 2002. It is apparent from its preparers (Item 6 of the general comments in Bill No. L 35) that it was known that the Bill would entail certain additional business expenses. .
It follows from telecommunications legislation that providers must provide electronic communications networks or services to end users at no cost to the state to ensure that the technical equipment and systems used by the provider are equipped to enable police to access telecommunications information and intervene in the message secret in the form of historical telecommunications information and expanded telecommunications information in accordance with the rules of Chapters 71 and 74 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is thus provided in telecommunications legislation that the costs associated with the design of the systems in order to make interference with the message secret possible must be borne by the telecommunications providers.
Regarding the telecommunications companies' costs as a result of the logging order, the Ministry of Justice can state that in April 2011 - in connection with the reporting on the then government's reduction of administrative burdens - an update of the AMVAB measurement (Activity-based) Measurement of Business Administrative Burdens) in the Ministry of Justice. With the update, a statement was made of the development of the administrative burdens of the Ministry of Justice's business-oriented legislation for the period July 2005 to the end of 2010. The statement is enclosed (available on www.amvab.dk).
About the administrative burdens of the telecommunications companies in relation to the logging order, it appears from the statement (page 22) that the telecommunications companies have assessed that they have ongoing burdens for approx. 60 million It is stated that the burdens are distributed by approx. 50 million DKK for the operation of the current logging systems and approx. 10 million DKK for depreciation of expenses for the development of new systems that have been established to meet the requirements of the Order on Logging.
It can be added that the police compensate the telecommunications providers for the actual costs associated with the telecommunications providers' assistance in making concrete interventions in the communication secret. "
In a statement dated May 11, 2017 to the Danish Business Authority, the Ministry of Justice stated the following about the logging order:
”By letter of 30 March 2017, the Danish Business Authority requested the Ministry of Justice an opinion as to whether Section 4 (6) of the Logging Order on MMS communication implies that the mobile operators are obliged to register and store a mobile device's location for certain types of data traffic other than MMS when it (1) the mobile operators must delete or anonymize location data traffic in accordance with section 23 (1) of the contract notice. 1, unless it follows from the logging order that the operators are required to record and store such data; and 2) the technical arrangement of the mobile operators' systems does not allow the location data for MMS to be separated from the location data for certain other types of mobile data traffic.
According to section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, it is incumbent on telecommunications service providers or telecommunications service providers to register and store (logging) for 1 year information on telecommunications traffic for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting criminal offenses. The Minister of Justice, after negotiating with the Minister of Business, and the Minister of Energy, Climate and Supply, shall lay down detailed rules on this registration and storage.
Pursuant to section 786 (2) of the Administration of Justice Act. 4, the logging order is issued. The order lays down the detailed rules for the logging that the providers must make.
Paragraph 1 of the Logging Order states that providers of electronic communications networks or services to end users must register and store information on telecommunications generated or processed in the provider's network, so that this information can be used as part of the investigation and prosecution of criminal offenses. relationship.
Further, Section 4 (6) of the Logging Order states that a provider of electronic communications networks or services to end users must register the following information on landline and mobile telephony as well as SMS, EMS and MMS communication: “the cell (s) a mobile phone is connected at the start and end of the communication, as well as the precise geographical or physical location of the associated masters at the time of communication. "
In this connection, the Ministry of Justice must state that it is expressly stated in section 4 (6) of the Logging Order that providers must log location information by MMS traffic, and that the order does not in this connection lay down prerequisites for the layout of the providers' technical systems. Thus, the provision in section 4 (6) of the Order on Logging to log location information by MMS traffic applies regardless of the layout of the providers' technical systems and thus also if the specific systems the providers use are arranged so that in connection with logging of MMS traffic also logs some additional location data on mobile data traffic.
In this connection, the Ministry of Justice must note that since the contract notice falls under the Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of Energy, Climate and Supply, the Ministry of Justice has no basis for deciding whether section 23 of the contract notice on the deletion or anonymization of traffic data provides a basis for requiring that In view of the logging rules, the mobile operators' systems must technically be designed in a way that allows the location data for MMS traffic to be separated from the location data for certain other types of mobile data traffic.
Finally, the Ministry of Justice can state that the Ministry is currently working on a bill to revise the logging rules. In this context, it is expected that the requirements for telecommunications providers' logging of location information for data traffic other than MMS traffic will be explicitly considered. It is expected that the bill on the revision of the logging rules will be presented in the parliamentary year 2017-18. ”
In a letter dated 28 November 2018, the Danish Data Protection Agency requested a supplementary opinion on the understanding of the above opinion of 11 May 2017. In this connection, the Danish Data Protection Authority stated, inter alia:
”[The Data Inspectorate immediately understands] The Ministry of Justice's opinion of 11 May 2017 that telecommunications providers are required under section 4 (6) of the Logging Order to register location data for MMS communication, irrespective of the layout of telecommunications providers' IT systems and that there may be other legislation than the Logging Order, which sets (other) requirements for the construction of telecommunications providers' IT systems, including processing of information in this regard. "
In response to the Danish Data Protection Agency's request, the Ministry of Justice, by letter of 10 December 2018, stated the following:
“To this end, the Ministry of Justice must announce that the Ministry has no comments on the Danish Data Protection Agency's understanding of the Ministry's opinion of 11 May 2017 to the Danish Business Authority. The Ministry can thus rely on the Ministry, as stated in the opinion, found no basis for deciding whether section 23 of the contract notice on the deletion or anonymization of traffic data provides a basis for requiring telecommunications providers' systems in the light of the logging rules to be technically arranged in a way that allows location data for MMS traffic to be separated from location data for certain other types of mobile data traffic. "
4.3. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
In general, TDC has stated that it was necessary to register location data for all mobile data traffic in order to comply with the logging order's requirement for registering location data for MMS communication, since the technical structure of TDC's mobile network does not allow the registration of location data for MMS alone. communication without simultaneously recording location data for all mobile data traffic.
Following a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that the construction of TDC's IT system cannot justify non-compliance with the data protection rules, as well as any costs associated with establishing new systems that allow only the necessary information to be registered, nor can it justify a failure to comply with data protection rules.
Thus, it is the Danish Data Protection Agency's assessment that TDC's processing of personal data, which TDC has not been obliged to register after the logging order, was in violation of Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (c) on data minimization.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that the vast majority of the information that TDC has registered on complaints has not been necessary to comply with TDC's obligations following the Order on Logging, with only 1.6% and 0.09% respectively of the data recorded as TDC has registered on complaints that twice the complaints have used its right to ask for access to its personal data at TDC, related to MMS communication.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that the information was only recorded due to TDC's mobile network structure and that TDC itself has stated that TDC has no purpose in registering the excess information in question.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that, already in connection with the issuing of the logging order, it was stated by the telecommunications industry that it would be costly for telecommunications providers to develop systems that only record the necessary information, but that the logging order was nevertheless issued in its current form.
Furthermore, it is the opinion of the Data Inspectorate that continuous coordination of location data for mobile data traffic and traffic data for MMS will not be a sufficient measure to comply with the basic principle of data minimization in Article 5 (2). 1 (c).
The Data Inspectorate has hereby emphasized that until the time of the interconnection TDC will continue to have collected a large amount of excess information for which TDC has no purpose.
The Data Inspectorate has also noted that TDC has stated that the company no longer records the information in question.
5. Concluding remarks
The Data Inspectorate hereby considers the case to be closed and thereafter does not proceed further in the case.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[2] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
