28. Activity Report for 2017 and 2018
Press release - page 1/5
Munich, 17.05.2019
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection, Prof. Dr. med. Thomas
Petri, today has his activity report for the years 2017 and 2018 of
Public presented. Among other things, the report deals with the following topics:
The main focuses of my work in the reporting period were
in the context of the data protection reform 2018 (Nos. 1 and 2)
the activity report). So I have the competent Bavarian ministries in the drafting of numerous draft laws and regulations
accompanied. This applies in particular to the new Bavarian Data Protection Act, which came into effect on 25 May 2018, punctually on the date of application of the General Data Protection Regulation. In addition, I could
advised many state and local authorities on the transition to the new privacy
My homepage now provides a wide range of information. These include in addition to detailed guidance
- about the information duties of the person responsible, the function
the Data Protection Officer or the Data Protection Impact Assessment Tool - numerous up-to-date brief information,
which also give concrete recommendations for action on specific issues arising from administrative practice.
Even though the work related to the data protection reform
Nevertheless, the data protection supervisory "everyday work" continues in 2018 and claimed to continue to claim considerable human resources. The number of entries from the citizenship and the
Inquiries from the authorities have increased significantly in connection with the data protection reform in 2018 and have remained at a high level.
Fortunately, the Bavarian public authorities largely take their reporting obligations for data breaches (No. 3.1.6)
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release from 17.05.2019 - page 2/5
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

very serious, so that many messages have reached me. The received messages provide a good overview of the work processes
Bavarian public authorities and the problems that arise there. So
I realized that electronic mailing of sensitive documents is still a big issue. Besides the misaddressing
Often there is a lack of encryption to secure the
Content. In many cases, therefore, the fax sent, the
However, this often leads to "spoofers" when entering numbers, so the
Fax arrives at wrong recipients. Messages about malware that
In one case, it has also led to a multi-day complete system failure in a hospital, demonstrating the importance of basic IT security, the use of up-to-date software, antivirus protection and employee awareness of all public authorities.
In addition to a critical examination of the Police Task Force Act (No. 4.1.1), the report also contains remarks on storage in police files (No. 4.4). Among other things, I illustrate with two cases, which effects the so-called
"Mitziehklausel" can have. After this scheme renewed a new one
police storage the storage duration of all "old" storage, since
the storage duration for all storages depends on the longest storage period. This can lead to, for example, so-called
"Youthful sins" are stored over unnecessarily long periods by the police
stay.
I also discuss intensively the changes made in 2018
Bavarian constitution protection law (No. 5.1). I see critically
about that there is no comprehensive notification obligation of the persons concerned
gives. Without knowledge of a secretly done intervention is an effective one
Legal protection but practically considerably more difficult or impossible.
Another topic is the Transfer Forms of Prisons (No 6.4.1), which allow relatives to send money to prisoners. These were originally designed so that
on the basis of the completed remittance slip for third parties (for example
Bank employees) it was apparent that the named person is in a correctional facility. At my instigation werePress release from 17.05.2019 - Page 3/5
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

the forms changed so that now no conclusions on
the prisoner property of said person is possible.
The - of me always warned - legal basis for the installation and
Operation of electronic water meters with radio module (No. 7.3) was in
insert the municipal code. So at the same time the so far initiated
Data processing enclosed and tightly limited. This new provision
contains, on the one hand, the long-term demanded unconditional right to object to the use of the radio function,
which the fee debtor, the owner and the authorized
User of the supplied object is entitled. For another, this standard looks
Immediate requirements for the processing of data in an electronic water meter. The central data protection principles of necessity (data minimization) and purpose limitation form the relevant benchmarks.
Against the background that, in particular, new parties to a choice
may submit a specific number of supporters' signatures of voting citizens to their constituency proposal
Community in a table to record the names of citizens already
have supported a constituency proposal (point 7.8.2). The community
must check that each supporter advocates only one suggestion
Has. Further information, in particular which party supports
was, but may not be stored.
On the basis of a complaint, I had to deal with the admissibility of the video surveillance of a communal housing for asylum seekers (No. 7.9) run by a district office. The outdoor area
The accommodation was almost comprehensive, the hallways of the four components were completely covered. In the process, 23 cameras were used. In view of the high intensity of intervention against residents, employees,
Volunteers and visitors appeared to continue the operation in
this form not possible. Therefore, I have asked the district office, at least a reduction in the scope of video surveillance
check. After the district office has not been able to remedy my continuing concerns about the admissibility of video surveillance, has

Press release from 17.05.2019 - page 4/5
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

it finally declares itself completely to refuse the video surveillance of the asylum-seeker housing.
To accompany the current evolution of digitization in healthcare (Item 8.1.3), the Conference of Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the Federation and the Länder has a sub-working group
which deals exclusively with this complex matter. The Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information has taken over the chairmanship of the sub-working group due to its nationwide importance. I am in my capacity as chairman
of the Working Group on Health and Social Affairs of the Data Protection Conference
continuously involved in their work. The sub-working group has already discussed numerous topics.
With guidance, resolutions, recommendations and guidelines
The Sub-Working Group, Politicians, Citizens and the Administration intends to provide helpful pointers for digitization in the healthcare sector
to provide.
In the reporting period, I have from several youth surveys
(No. 9.5.1). It is about an instrument of the carrier
the public youth welfare service, with the desires, needs and interests of young people regarding the leisure offer
to be queried. The result of the survey should then be incorporated into the so-called youth welfare planning.
In most cases, the public youth welfare service providers initially started from an anonymous survey of children and adolescents.
In fact, due to the concrete and extensive issues a personal reference was at least producible. That's why
also data protection regulations are observed. So must about
Data protection instructions provided and in the integration of service providers data protection regulations are observed in the context
of a contract should be laid down.
The subject of several requests from municipalities was the information access by the local council: This coveted the provision of a
"Best List" of the business taxpayers (No. 10.2). Information in
Pressemitteilung vom 17.05.2019 – Seite 5/5
Der Bayerische Landesbeauftragte für den Datenschutz informiert

chen Listen fallen unter das Steuergeheimnis und sind oft auch als personenbezogene Daten zu werten, etwa, wenn sie einen Einzelkaufmann mit
einem Ladengeschäft betreffen. Meine steuer- und kommunalrechtliche
Würdigung machte deutlich, dass dem Gemeinderat derart sensible Informationen ohne einen konkreten Anlass grundsätzlich nicht überlassen
werden dürfen.
Beim Online-Kartenvorverkauf öffentlicher Theater (Nr. 11.4) dürfen
personenbezogene Daten der Kartenkäufer solange gespeichert werden,
wie es für die Abwicklung des Vorgangs erforderlich ist. Darüber hinausgehende, längerfristige Speicherungen insbesondere der Bankverbindungsdaten in einem Benutzerkonto sind mit Einwilligung des jeweiligen
Kartenkäufers zulässig. Im Rahmen meiner Aufsichtstätigkeit habe ich ein
Theater aufgefordert, sein Verfahren entsprechend umzustellen, da es
diese Anforderungen bislang nicht ausreichend beachtet hat.
Um den Schutz der personenbezogenen Daten von Gemeindebediensteten ging es bei einer Anfrage aus einer Kommune. Dort hatte der Rechnungsprüfungsausschuss des Gemeinderats die Vorlage der Gehaltsabrechnungen (Nr. 12.5) aller Beschäftigten gefordert. Meine Prüfung
ergab, dass der Ausschuss kein generelles, voraussetzungsloses Einsichtsrecht hat, sondern in jedem Einzelfall konkret darlegen muss, dass
die Kenntnis der geforderten Daten für seine Aufgabenerfüllung erforderlich ist. Nur dann kann sich das öffentliche Interesse an einer umfassenden Rechnungsprüfung gegen den Schutz der – an sich strikt abgeschirmten – Personalaktendaten durchsetzen.

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

Der Bayerische Landesbeauftragte für den Datenschutz kontrolliert bei den bayerischen öffentlichen Stellen die Einhaltung datenschutzrechtlicher Vorschriften. Er ist vom Bayerischen
Landtag gewählt, unabhängig und niemandem gegenüber weisungsgebunden.
