05.02.2019Safer Internet Day 2019: "On the net? Certainly! "| 02/2019

On the occasion of the Safer Internet Day 2019 the Ministry of Justice and for Europe and consumer protection, the country commissioner for data protection and for the right of file inspection and the consumer center Brandenburg are together on 5 February 2019 in Brandenburg on the topic "in the net? on road.
For the joint flyer campaign "Secure your Smartphone" at Potsdam Central Station, Minister Ludwig declared:
"Recent cases of data theft and data misuse (Facebook scandal, data trading and publishing via Twitter) show that every user has to question their own behavior in the network. Unfortunately, consumers can not rely on the protection of their data by the companies 100 percent. This has to change. Companies that misuse data must be sanctioned. "
 
The State Data Protection Officer, Ms Hartge, pointed out the practical implementation:
"On the Internet, data protection and data security go hand in hand, as well as traditional computers and smartphones, which are an integral part of everyday life, so it's worth taking basic measures to protect these devices your own data fall into the wrong hands, so smart phone backup tips are the focus of our joint action. "
 
Dr. Christian A. Rumpke, Managing Director of the Verbraucherzentrale Brandenburg added:
"We see time and again that apps demand significantly more permissions than would be necessary for their business: Does a QR code reader really need access to all the contacts stored in the phone? We say" no "and require companies to provide data-sparing products and services Consumers Consciously, consumers can help make good offers prevail by making informed choices against data bank apps. "

In a representative forsa survey in 2016, Brandenburg citizens had already stated that they had the most consumer protection problems when using the Internet. Accordingly, consumers expect politicians to do more in the area of ​​data protection. For most consumers (92% according to the 2016 forsa survey), it is important to have control over who receives what data from them when purchasing goods and services. Many do not want their data to be used for advertising and offers. As this is often very different in practice and consumers do not always pay attention to their protection, strengthening consumer digital literacy is an important approach to data protection and data security (in addition to strengthening and implementing data protection law).
In order for consumers to be able to act on an equal footing with other market participants and to retain control over their data, they can do a great deal themselves. The development of consumer competencies helps them to move confidently and oriented in the markets. Competent consumers can act with greater awareness and self-determination and also protect themselves.
Background:
Safer Internet Day 2019 is an annual European Day of Action for More Security on the Internet initiated by the European Union. This year's motto is "Safer Internet Day 2019 - Together for a Better Internet". Here, different players are committed to online safety and a better Internet for children and adolescents. Globally, this day is coordinated by the European Insafe network under the European Commission's CEF Telecom Program. In Germany, klicksafe.de coordinates the day of action and calls for participation in its own actions.
  
Sven Müller - Press Spokesman
Lisa Högden - Press Spokeswoman
Dr. Uwe Krink - Press Spokesman
