Soro. The Guarantor has never hindered the fight against tax evasion Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Cristina Bartelli, &quot;Italia Oggi&quot;, 3 October 2019) For the payments made there is the risk of an all-round cataloging of consumption. In writing the rules, attention must be paid to the quality of the data for the identikit of the evasion risk. Then there is the need for a change in the IT risk management of data to be avoided by the public administration in order to avoid new access to fiscal databases, as happened for the spesometro, when millions of sensitive information were at the mercy of everyone. Antonello Soro, president of the Authority for the protection of personal data, explains to ItaliaOggi what are the guarantees to put in place for the tax payers and to those who accuse that too much privacy limits the fight against evasion replies: &quot;The posts set by the Guarantor concern essentially to security measures to prevent unauthorized access and measures to ensure quality and accuracy of data, thus making reliable the criteria on which to base the evasion risk profile &quot;. Question. The problem of the fight against tax evasion, of why it is not done and not of expected results, is the Privacy Guarantor ... or have I misunderstood? Reply. The Guarantor has not only never hindered, but rather has always supported the measures aimed at strengthening the effectiveness of the action to combat tax evasion, in the search for the best balance between the functionality of the checks and the right to the protection of personal data . The measures prescribed by the Authority have contributed to improving the incisiveness of the action to combat evasion, minimizing the risk of cyber attacks to the precious information assets of the Revenue Agency and ensuring the success of the assessments through the accuracy of the data (and therefore the reliability of the profiling) on which they are based. Q. What poles does the Guarantor set up, having its nose periodically turned over to the Revenue Agency? A. The posts set by the Guarantor essentially concern safety measures to prevent unauthorized access and measures to ensure quality and accuracy of data, thus making reliable the criteria on which to base the evasion risk profile and basing the investigations on solid assumptions. These measures have never been disputed by the Agency, with which instead there is a consolidated relationship of loyal collaboration. Those who exploit the positions of the Guarantor, if anything, are others. Q. How is the history of the spesometro ended, the first very big data breach of the PA? R. In that specific case (which occurred during the validity of the Code which, on this point, adopted a regime quite different from that of the Gdpr), Sogei adopted the measures necessary to minimize the risk of future, further violations of personal data. However, as we pointed out in a note to the President of the Council of Ministers after the incident, a change in the first place in the approach to cyber risk management and personal data protection is necessary. D. In one of the last provisions on the algorithm for identifying profiles of tax evaders at risk, the Revenue Agency had undertaken to send you the results of the trials. What results did you receive? R. With the provision of 20 July 2017, the Guarantor favorably assessed the procedure for selecting taxpayers based on the tax risk profile identified, proposed by the Revenue Agency on an experimental basis precisely to test, in relation to a restricted sample, the effectiveness and adequacy of the calculation criteria used, to be extended in the subsequent phase in the event of a positive outcome based on the results of the assessment. In the present case, the Guarantor has deemed the measures assured by the Agency in relation to this type of tax verification to be appropriate, only requiring the transmission of the results of the trial (which to us is still in progress), in view of the further uses of the hypothesized analysis model. Q. What are the risks to Nadef&#39;s new traceability of payments? R. In general, the following must be guaranteed: the confidentiality of the information flows thus activated and the security of the channels used for this purpose; the proportionality of the processing of personal data collected and managed (which must not exceed the calculation capacity of the information systems available to the Agency, on pain of a massive collection of a completely useless information), also to prevent a massive profiling consumption, considering that in the complex chain of data management, in addition to financial administration, single economic operators are included; the accuracy and quality of the data used in order to draw up the risk profile for individual evasion, indispensable for providing algorithms with reliable parameters suitable for identifying the subjects on which it is more useful to concentrate the controls. D. The first opinion on the provision on the register of personal data is from 2012, the Guarantor asked for more guarantees. The second green light came only in 2017. How come all this time? R. The time elapsed between the various opinions issued by the Guarantor on the provisions of the Agency was certainly not the result of unnecessary delays or delays in the conduct of the complex investigations that such assessments require. The first provision concerned the measures that the Agency had to put in place to secure data on the balances of the approximately 600 million financial reports that would have been collected systematically, to prevent the risk of undue access to an information asset so precious. The timing of the subsequent exploitation of these data was dictated exclusively by the Inland Revenue and Sogei which had to adopt the necessary precautions during that period to verify the information received, making it usable and comparable with the other databases.