The right to oblivion reorders the web Speech by Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (&quot;La Repubblica&quot;, 30 September 2019) Dear Editor, the issue of governance of the digital society is increasingly breaking out, with force of the great &quot;democratic questions&quot;, in European law, in an attempt to outline the best balance between innovation and freedom. The Court of Justice, with two judgments has dealt, between shadows and lights, with some important aspects of the relationship between information, new technologies and dignity, through the prism of the right to be forgotten. Twenty years ago, it was born as a right not to suffer the detrimental effects of the republication, after some time, of a piece of news that was legitimately distributed in origin but no longer actual. The linear relationship between current news, publication and oblivion has changed profoundly with the advent of new technologies. The network cancels the temporal distance between one publication and the next one, hosting news that goes back even without interruptions, often overtaken by events and therefore no longer current. The same right to oblivion has thus undergone an important metamorphosis, enriching its content and making use of different means of protection. Among these, a de-indexation of news, though legitimately published originally but which has become outdated for the time elapsed, has taken on decisive importance, also thanks to the judgment of the same Court in 2014. Since then, citizens have increasingly used this remedy to guarantee the &quot;right to downsize their media visibility&quot; with respect to the perhaps more meaningful implication of information on the web: the ability to attribute to each, with the pervasiveness of a planetary medium and the power of indexing, new identities, often insensitive to the passage of time. And this aspect is developed by the new ruling of the Court of Justice, with some particularly significant implications for judicial reporting. According to the Court, the profile of the person, drawn up by the search engine by organizing the indexed news, must reflect the current (even judicial) condition, thus removing the links to articles not updated to the evolution of the case, whenever the negative impact on the identity is disproportionate to the need to easily find the news. Thus, even if this requirement is not recessive and it is not therefore necessary to de-index, the information returned by the search engine must be displayed in order to reflect the actual judicial position of the person. The news of the acquittal must not, for example, be placed in a queue to a plurality of more dating links, relating to the imputation, precautionary measures, even the non-definitive sentence. In short, the criterion of accuracy and updating (and not that of the number of clicks) must govern the algorithm of search engines which, having an increasingly central role with respect to information on the net, they cannot entrust such significant decisions on fundamental rights to mere information technology. The new ruling therefore adds another element to the strengthening of platform accountability with respect to activities that have a decisive impact on fundamental rights, also using the technique for protection rather than limiting freedoms. Moreover, these techniques will have to be used to prevent the limitation of deindexing only to the European pages of search engines - confirmed in these days with another and less &quot;courageous&quot; judgment of the Court - to end up nullifying one of the most important achievements of these years: the right to be forgotten, in fact.