PRESS RELEASE
DESPITE GOOD RESPONSE TO THE DSGVO SURVEY OF THE LFDI:
MUNICH IN BADEN-WÜRTTEMBERG NEED MORE SUPPORT AT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIVACY
For a good year, the communities in Baden-Württemberg have to meet the requirements
of the new European data protection law (DS-GVO). A survey of the
Country Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI), who is the
Implementation status has queried all 1,101 communities is with today
completed. The municipalities became an online catalog with 50 questions
presented the main areas of the new data protection law. Of the
Questionnaire is attached as an attachment.
"Very positive result"
"About 86% of Baden-Württemberg's municipalities have participated in the survey.
This shows that the communities take privacy very seriously. And that the
Communication with the LfDI works well. That's a very positive result!
We will now evaluate the answers in peace and analyze where problems exist and
Requirements were reported. In particular, we want to find out where further support
is necessary and how this can be done ", said the State Data Protection Officer Dr. med.
Brink. Overall, Brink is very satisfied with the way the survey is conducted. "We obtain
thus a realistic picture, as it concerns the data protection with the municipal administrations in the
is ordered throughout the country. This is a valuable insight, based on our further work in the
will have a decisive influence on the municipal sector ", emphasizes Brink.
Small communities often overwhelmed
The feedback from the municipalities already gives a first insight
to: Smaller communities are often overwhelmed with the new data protection law and
refer in particular to lack of human resources. "Especially for small communities
It is very difficult to comply with all specifications. Here the LfDI must support even more - but
The state government is also required! ", Brink emphatically states.

King Street 10 a

+49 711 7 61 55 41 - 716

70173 Stuttgart

pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de

https://www.badenwuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/

Ideas are already being developed: greater inter-communal cooperation is offered
could also be a co-operation on data protection organized at district level
for smaller communities a great relief. The state data protection officer
himself will examine whether and how he can better support the communities, for example through
additional consulting and training services. Not an easy task - "But we
do our best! ", so the feedback of a community with approx. 5,000 inhabitants.
Too many communities in the digital offside
Another finding is that a (small) part of the Baden-Württemberg municipalities
digital is not available. The poll was posted online, each community received one
individual link with which she had access to the questionnaire and was in various
Contexts several times by e-mail to the survey. About 7% of Baden-Wuerttemberg municipalities have never called their link.
What exactly has its reason for this, still needs to be analyzed. In any case, it does too
in view of the digitization strategy of the state government one too
negligible factor that a not small number of communities in Baden-Württemberg digital simply "does not take place". Those Baden-Württemberg municipalities, the
The questionnaire has not yet been answered by the LfDI next week
contacted and asked for an explanation. Here, too, is the assistance in the
Foreground.
A final content evaluation of the survey is expected in September
presented. The results will feed into the brochure "Data Protection for Local Authorities",
which is available at the end of the year and the Baden-Württemberg municipalities
will give you more orientation.
If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
