GZ: DSB-D123.527 / 0004-DSB / 2018 dated 15.1.2019 [Note: Editors: Names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] COPY LAW The DPA decides on the data protection complaint of Dr. med. Philipp A *** (Complainant) of 26 September 2018 against Med-Search *** GmbH (Respondent), represented by Mag. Ottokar G ***, Attorney at Law in Vienna, for breach of secrecy and breach in the right of cancellation as follows: - The appeal is dismissed as unfounded. Legal basis: Article 12 (4), Article 17, Article 57 (1) (f), Article 77 (1) of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), OJ C. No. L 119 of 4.5.2016, p. 1; §§ 1, 24 Abs. 1 und 5 of the Data Protection Act (DSG), BGBl. I Nr. 165/1999 idgF. GROUNDS A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. By submission of 26 September 2018, the complainant alleged infringement of the right to erasure and summarized that he was a general practitioner at the Respondent's physician search and assessment platform, www.med-search * **. at, is listed. By letter dated 30 May 2018, he had asked the Respondent to delete all his data on www.med-search ***. At. However, the Respondent refused to delete it in its reply of 30 May 2018 on the same day. The complainant further submitted that the fundamentally public data according to § 27 ÄrzteG would be generated by the evaluations made on the respondent's evaluation platform for new - unpublished - data and information. Due to the settled jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice, not even secrecy interests should be violated here, rather it should be based on all interests worthy of protection. In its decision of 23 September 2014 concerning GZ VI ZR 358/13, the German Federal Court of Justice also recognized that assessments of physicians not only had a considerable impact on the social and occupational validity of a doctor, but would also influence the choice of doctor requiring treatment. which would have a direct impact on the doctor's chances of competing with other physicians and, in the case of negative assessments, could even jeopardize professional survival. Moreover, the naming of the general personality right of § 16 ABGB is violated, because due to the combination of generally accessible data with often incorrect allegations and statements of patients reputation and reputation is impaired. 2. In its statement of 30 October 2018, the Respondent stated in summary that public data pursuant to § 27 ÄrzteG of the complainant would actually be published on the platform www.med-search ***. At and that patients would provide ratings and reports there could. The processing of the relevant data is based on a predominant legitimate interest of the Respondent. This would be in the interests of keeping a fully public record of all established physicians and of allowing patients to read, publish and facilitate the search for physicians. The Respondent offers physicians the opportunity to present themselves, receive feedback and comment on testimonials. The Respondent's interest is protected in particular by the constitutionally protected right to freedom of expression and information. A consent of the doctor is not required. In addition, the Respondent forbids in its Terms and Conditions inadmissible content, in particular untrue and reputation-damaging statements. In the event that inaccurate statements were actually made by a patient, the Respondent offered to report such testimonials. These reports would be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and, if necessary, removed. In addition, physicians could also comment on patient testimonials. From the decision of the German Federal Court of Justice of 23 September 2014 on the GZ VI ZR 358/13 mentioned by the complainant was nothing to win: The BGH had considered the processing of medical data for the operation of a physician search and evaluation portal on the contrary admissible and the cancellation claim of dismissed on deletion complaining doctor. As regards the allegation of interference in naming rights or the general right of personality according to § 16 ABGB, it should be noted that the data protection authority is not responsible for this. 3. The complainant replicated that, according to the parties to the findings of the preliminary investigation, in his statement of 21 November 2018, it summarized that the terms and conditions of the Respondent actually included that false allegations or incorrect testimonials from patients were inadmissible. However, the Respondent does not check compliance with the GTC, especially as the Respondent can hardly check whether a patient, for example, had to wait in the waiting room for as long as indicated in the assessment, partly because of the obvious lack of specialist knowledge or the simple inactivity of the respondent. The complainant provided an example assessment of his opinion in this regard in order to clarify his point of view. In addition, the Respondent actually offers physicians the opportunity to comment on patient ratings. However, this was not reasonable since the complainant had to visit the Respondent's platform daily or at least at very short intervals in order to provide justifications or explanations for patient evaluations. It could not be part of the medical profession that doctors would have to invalidate false statements from patients on the platform in order to avert damage to reputation and business. The reputation and reputation of a doctor is a very worthy of protection interest, which is why the balancing of interests must be due to the overriding interest in favor of doctors. The partly incorrect factual allegations, information and complaints of the patients on the platform of the Respondent are in no way related to the reputation and business damage to the doctors. The general public's interest in sometimes even incorrect statements of fact or information (eg about the waiting time in the waiting room until the start of treatment) is not the same as the interest of the public in exercising the right to press freedom or for research purposes. B. Object of the complaint 1. It is not only the wording of the complaint which is considerable for party submissions, but also the will of the party. The existence of conditions must not be interpreted in a strictly formal way, provided that the subject-matter of the proceedings - even if interpreted in the light of the arguments set out in §§ 6 u. 7 ABGB - unquestionably, thus without possibility of a confusion to recognize (VwGH 13.11.2014, Ra2014 / 12/0010). The - unrepresented and unenforceable - complainant has asserted a violation of the general right of privacy according to § 16 ABGB; A violation of this rule would have to be invoked by civil law. However, it is apparent from the complainant's entire allegation that he wishes to find out whether there has been an infringement of the right to secrecy under § 1 DSG by publishing the complainant's personal data on www.med-search ***. At. 2. In addition, the subject of the complaint is the question of whether the Respondent has thereby infringed the right of the Applicant to deletion by completing the complainant's application of 30 May 2018 for deletion of all his data on the platform www.med-search ***. at not having met. C. Factual findings 1. The applicant practices as a general practitioner and is a member of the Vienna Medical Association. The Respondent operates under the domain www.med-search ***. At a physician search and review portal. The professional address, telephone number, office hours, diplomas and certificates as well as the name of the complainant are published on the website www.med-search ***. At in the form of a doctor profile. The Respondent derives these datasets from the source https://www.praxisplan.at/ (a web page of the Medical Association for Vienna). Patients can rate a visit to the doctor in the form of a rating scale (1 point = least satisfaction, 5 points = highest satisfaction), with a detailed assessment (in terms of empathy, trust, treatment, service offer, practice equipment, care in practice, waiting time in the waiting room and waiting time on appointment) is possible. In addition, patients can write a short review in the form of a free text field. Evaluation of evidence: The findings are based on the complainant's undisputed entry of 26 September 2018, on the Respondent's statement of 30 October 2018 and on an official search of the website www.med-search ***. At and the webpage of the Vienna Medical Association, https://www.praxisplan.at/ (both retrieved on 10 January 2019). 2. The Appellant has implemented various protective mechanisms to counteract the submission of inaccurate testimonials. Next to each testimonial is a "flag" symbol, so that doctors can report them and the report - after appropriate review - also removed from the doctor's profile by the Respondent, if it violates the terms and conditions of the Respondent. In addition, a weighting filter is in use to prevent multiple scores within a short time by the same user. Furthermore, doctors can also comment on the testimonials and receive a notification e-mail when they submit a new evaluation on their doctor's profile, which requires a free registration for this service. The Respondent also offers physicians the option of purchasing a Premium Profile Large, a Premium Profile Medium and a Premium Profile Small for a fee on the platform www.med-search ***. At. The Responder's marketing services vary depending on the profile offered. In addition, a "top position in the Med-Search *** search result" can be obtained for a fee. Regardless of whether a doctor's profile is a paying physician ("premium listing") or a free "basic profile", the local doctors ("other doctors in the area") are displayed on the profiles. The "Practice Marketing for Doctors" Guidelines of the Respondent reads in part as follows (formatting not reproduced 1: 1): [Editor's note: The document reproduced here as a facsimile from the website of the letter can not be pseudonymised for legal documentation purposes at a reasonable cost be reproduced. It contains a tabular overview of performance with regard to the "premium entries".] Assessment of evidence: The findings made are based on an official search on the web page www.med-search ***. At and the freely accessible "practice marketing for doctors" guideline of the Respondent (retrieved on 10 January 2018). D. From a legal point of view it follows: 1. The right to secrecy As a national supervisory authority within the meaning of Art. 51 DSGVO, the Data Protection Authority is responsible for complaints in accordance with §§ 18 (1) and 24 (1) DSG, if an affected person is of the opinion that the processing of personal data concerning you violates the GDPR or § 1 or article 2 1. main section DSG. The Data Protection Authority has already dealt with the admissibility of the publication of medical data by the Austrian Medical Association (or the Medical Association in the respective federal state) and stated that the authorization to publish from the legal mandate to maintain an electronic list ("list of doctors") According to § 27 para 1 ÄrzteG 1998 (see the decision of the DPA dated 17 December 2018, GZ: DSB-D123.040 / 0006-DSB / 2018; see also the judgment of the Supreme Court of June 27, 2016, GZ 6 Ob 48 / 16a). It is clear from this that the data mentioned under § 27 (1) (1) to (17) ÄrzteG 1998 must be regarded as data which does not deserve protection within the meaning of Section 1 (1) of the DSG due to the obligatory publication and, moreover, an allowance for processing under Art. 6 para. 1 lit. e DSGVO is available. 2. For the reproduction of admissibly published data At the same time, however, it must be taken into account that the very general assumption of non-infringement of legitimate confidentiality interests for permissible published data is not compatible with the provisions of the GDPR (see the decision of the DPA of 31 October 2018, GZ : DSB-D123.076 / 0003-DSB / 2018 mwN). The case in question should also be considered in a differentiated way insofar as the appellant expressly submits that, by linking the data sets in accordance with § 27 (1) ÄrzteG 1998 with evaluations and reports on the platform www.med-search ***. At "new data and information is generated ". The complainant is to be agreed, since the Respondent is not limited to a mere reproduction of the data sets within the meaning of § 27 Abs. 1 ÄrzteG 1998, but this combined with the possibility of submitting a rating and an experience report, with several different detailed ratings also form an overall rating. As a result, the Respondent creates an additional informational value, which involves new personal data of the complainant that are processed beyond the data sets pursuant to § 27 (1) of the ÄrzteG 1998. In any case, such a combination is encompassed by the concept of processing according to Art. 4 no. 2 DSGVO and requires an authorization requirement in accordance with Art. 6 GDPR (see legal status under the DSG 2000 Kotschy in Jahnel (Hrsg), Data Protection Law and E-Government Yearbook 2012, 27 [47] according to which a combination of publicly available data with other data must completely reconsider the admissibility of their use). In this regard, the Respondent relies on Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO. Accordingly, processing is only lawful if the processing is necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of the controller or a third party, and provided that the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject requiring the protection of personal data do not prevail. In connection with the asserted right of cancellation, it should be noted that an application for cancellation in accordance with Art. 17 DSGVO must be complied with, inter alia, if, pursuant to para. 1 lit. d leg. cit. the data was processed unlawfully (ie without a license). If there is no balance of interests in favor of the complainant, the present complaint would therefore have to be complied with because of an infringement of the right to erasure and the complainant's personal data would have to be deleted for lack of legitimacy of processing. It should also be taken into account that the right to a cancellation in accordance with Art. 17 (1) GDPR can not be exercised if the processing within the meaning of Section 3 lit. a leg. cit. required to exercise the right to freedom of expression and information under Article 11 GRC (or to exercise the right to freedom of expression under Article 10 ECHR). Ultimately, however, it can remain an open question whether the admissibility of the refusal of the deletion request is based on Art. 17 (1) lit. d or para. 3 lit. a DSGVO verifies, since in both constellations a balancing of interests is to be carried out, which leads to the same result. Finally, the result of this balancing of interests is also decisive for the question of whether there is an infringement of the right to secrecy or whether the legitimate interests of another within the meaning of Section 1 (2) of the DSG outweigh the complainant's interest in confidentiality. 3. Balance of interests Therefore, an assessment of the legitimate interests of the person responsible (the respondent as operator of the physician search and assessment platform) and of third parties (the patients) must be carried out and are those interests as well as possible consequences for the complainant (as on the Platform listed physician), which result from the physical processing. Any protective measures taken to prevent or mitigate inappropriate consequences for the complainant, which have been implemented by the Respondent, must also be taken into account (cf the key factors to be taken into account when weighing up the interests, Art. 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 06/2014) Concept of a legitimate interest of the controller in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 95/46 / EC, WP 217, 844/14 / EN, p. 43). In the context of this balancing of interests, it should also be borne in mind that Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f the DSGVO has two cumulative conditions for the Respondent to rely on the grounds for this: Firstly, the processing must be necessary to safeguard the legitimate interests of the controller or a third party and, secondly, may the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject protect the personal data (See, for example, Article 7 (f) of Directive 95/46 / EC, the judgment of the ECJ of 24 November 2011, C-468/10 and C-469/10 (ASNEF and FECEMD), paragraph 38 ). 4. Assessment of the interests The complainant can not be challenged initially if he points out that the German Federal Supreme Court in the cited decision of 23 September 2014 concerning the GZ VI ZR 358/13 - in a similar situation - actually stated that "[...] the evaluations not only have a significant impact on the social and professional validity of a physician. On the contrary, they can also influence the choice of doctors in need of treatment, thereby directly affecting the physician's chances of competing with other doctors and even jeopardizing his or her professional existence in the case of negative assessments. "However, the German Federal Court of Justice is nevertheless one of the parties after a comprehensive balancing of interests The result is that the balance in favor of the defendant and its users (ie the operator of the physician assessment platform as well as the patient) fails and was finally pronounced that no cancellation claim exists. For completeness, reference is made in this connection to a further decision of the German Federal Supreme Court dated February 20, 2018 (but not taken by the complainant) concerning Regional Administrative Court ZR 30/17, in which the Federal Court of Justice again requests a deletion from a medical examination and evaluation platform. In the case now underlying the BGH, a German physician search and evaluation platform has designed the doctor profiles such that a non-paying doctor has displayed information about locally competing doctors by means of an overlay button or a crossbar, while a physician (" Premium customer ") were not displayed on the local competition advertising promotional information. The BGH stated that the defendant could thus leave their position as a "neutral" information intermediary and assert the fundamental right of freedom of opinion and media even with less weight. The BGH therefore approved, as a result of the plaintiff, a "legitimate interest in the exclusion of storage" of their data. However, the facts to be examined before the data protection authority are to be considered differently, as are paying physicians with a "premium entry" on whose profile the locally practicing physicians ("other physicians in the vicinity") are displayed and therefore the considerations of the German Federal Court of Justice do not apply Find. It can not be denied, however, that given the practical relevance of search and review portals and the market-dominant position of www.med-search ***. At negative reviews and testimonials may actually influence the choice of doctors of potential patients. However, it must be pointed out that the complainant is not prevented from undisturbed practice of his profession if he does not pay any contributions ("premium entry") and therefore does not appear primarily in the defendant's list (see already the above judgment of the Supreme Court of 27 June 1994) ). In addition, patients will provide a corresponding assessment only after appropriate treatment by the complainant. In other words, the complainant has basically in his own hands to receive appropriate ratings on the platform through his range of services. The Data Protection Authority does not overlook the fact that there will always be people who make individual reviews or testimonials in individual cases. Also, it must not be overlooked that an affected person (such as a "dissatisfied patient") can abuse the platform and make multiple negative reviews. The Respondent, however, offers the possibility for such cases to report and - under certain circumstances - also to remove such reports of experience that violate the Respondent's Terms of Business. In addition to each report, there is a flag symbol in order to be able to report it quickly and efficiently. In addition, reviews can also be commented accordingly. Furthermore, the Respondent has implemented a "rating filter" to counter multiple reviews by the same person within a short period of time. The complainant is therefore not exposed to the experience reports or evaluations of patients on www.med-search ***. At. There is no danger of stigmatization, exclusion or pillorying in this case (cf the legal position according to DSG 2000 Jahnel, freedom of expression and data protection using the example of online platforms, S & R 1/2015, 35 [41]). The complainant argues that it is unreasonable that he would have to visit the Respondent's platform on a daily basis - at least at very short intervals - in order to provide justifications or explanations on patient ratings. It should be noted, however, that the Respondent foresees the possibility of a notification e-mail in a new evaluation (with a free registration for this service is necessary), thus the resources of the complainant are spared. If the complainant complains that patients as well as the Respondent have no professional expertise to submit or review such testimonials, it must be pointed out to him that the feedback on www.med-search ***. At does not matter at all: Thus, such experience reports implicitly that it is a personal perception of the respective patient. In addition, www.med-search ***. At basically offers only a detailed evaluation (for example with regard to empathy, relationship of trust, treatment, services, practical equipment, care in practice, waiting time in the waiting room and waiting time on appointment) which, of course, is merely a subjective one Rating are accessible. In other words, it is in the nature of such rating platforms that a professional layman gives his personal opinion on a specific offer. In addition, the Respondent does not offer any subject-specific assessment options (such as "medical expertise of the physician") (see the legal status of the DSG 2000 the decision of the former Data Protection Commission of 21 March 2007, GZ K121.246 / 0008-DSK / 2007, according to which the requirement of data accuracy is linked to the intended use of the data, provided that this is only in the documentation of opinions or assessments, the data are correct from a data protection point of view if this opinion or assessment is reproduced correctly). In addition, the reports on experience relate to the professional activity of the complainant, that is, to an area in which personal development takes place from the outset in contact with the environment. The complainant therefore needs to be prepared from the outset to monitor his behavior by a broad public and to criticize his performance. This applies in particular to self-employed physicians who offer their services in competition with other physicians (see the decision of the German Federal Court of Justice of 23 September 2014 to GZ VI ZR 358/13 mwN, assigning the professional activity of the "social sphere" and points out that in this respect a low level of protection is to be assumed than if data are to be associated with the "private or secret sphere"). On the other hand, there is a considerable interest of the public or of patients in obtaining information about medical services, especially as Austria generally has a free choice of doctor. Through a search and evaluation portal, such as that operated by the Respondent, persons who are sometimes unfamiliar with one another, have just the opportunity to easily and efficiently exchange views on a particular topic and can provide individuals with such a platform as an additional search and information source use medical care and health services. (See again the above decision of the German Federal Supreme Court of 23 September 2014 supra). It must be borne in mind that the right to freedom of expression and information enshrined in Article 11 GRC, or the right to freedom of expression enshrined in Article 10 of the ECHR, in addition to the expression of opinions, also expressly include the receipt and transmission of messages or Protecting ideas. The delivery and receipt of reviews or experience reports is thus recorded in any case. The Respondent therefore contributes to the operation of its Physician Search and Review Portal by allowing valuable information and opinions to be shared with the public and made available to them free of charge, thereby creating social added value. In addition, there is a clear recognition and expectation of patients that the Respondent as the operator of the physician search and assessment platform can process the necessary data (see also Art. 29 Data Protection Working Party, WP 217, p Gives weight if a responsible person acts not only in the business interest, but the processing also in the interest of the wider public lies). The fact that the Respondent also offers marketing options ("premium services") and thus intends to make a profit does no harm, especially as a certain commercial success may even be the indispensable prerequisite for the continuation of such search and evaluation platforms (cf. Judgment of the ECJ of 16 December 2008, C-73/07 [Satakunnan Markkinapörssi and Satamedia] paragraph 59). 5. Conclusion Overall, the data protection authority therefore comes to the conclusion that, due to the balance of interests involved, there is no breach in the right to secrecy, as the legitimate interests of portal users (ie patients) outweigh the legitimate interests of the complainant (§ 1 Para. 2 DSG). Consequently, the processing of personal data is lawful and the condition of Art. 17 (1) lit. d DSGVO is not fulfilled. In addition, in accordance with Article 17 (3) (a) of the GDPR, the processing is required for exercising the right to freedom of expression and information. The Respondent was right not to comply with the complainant's cancellation request of 30 May 2018. It was therefore appropriate to decide.
