1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

To: Hall and Hanley Limited

Of: 1% Floor, Building 4, Universal Square, Devonshire Street North,
Manchester M12 6JH

ls The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Hall and Hanley Limited (‘H&H”) with a monetary penalty under section
55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in relation
to a serious contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy and
Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

2. This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

a H&H, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 07851228), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
instigated the transmission of unsolicited communications by means of
electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of direct

marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.

4, Regulation 22 of PECR states:
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited
communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
@
1C O o
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Individual” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a living individual

and includes an unincorporated body of such individuals”.

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “any text,
voice, sound or image message sent over a public electronic
communications network which can be stored in the network or in the
recipient’s terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and

includes messages sent using a short message service”.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements
of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person,
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.

(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
10.

11.

12.

13.

ie
] C O Qo
Information Commissioner's Office
(3) This subsection applies if the person —-

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

SO as to give effect to the Directives.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

Mobile phone users can report the receipt of unsolicited marketing text
messages to the GSMA’s Spam Reporting Service by forwarding the
message to 7726 (spelling out “SPAM”). The GSMA is an organisation

that represents the interests of mobile operators worldwide. The
14.

15.

TG).

17.

@
oD
Information Commissioner's Office
Commissioner is provided with access to the data on complaints made

to the 7726 service and this data is incorporated into a Monthly Threat

Assessment (MTA) used to ascertain organisations in breach of PECR.

Subscribers are also able to report complaints of unsolicited direct
marketing text messages to the Commissioner directly using the ICO’s

online reporting tool.

H&H first came to the attention of the Commissioner following a large
number of complaints being received about unsolicited direct marketing
messages advertising the services of H&H on the 7726 service,
together with a quantity of complaints being made to the ICO’s own

online reporting tool.

In total the Commissioner notes that there were 1,257 complaints
made via the 7726 service; with a further 96 complaints being made

directly to the Commissioner.

Some of the complaints include the following:

"IT have checked and I do not have PPI. Hall & Hanley did not have my

consent to send me this message’;

"I have not consented to these types of messages and it is very
concerning and worrying how this company has got hold of my mobile

number’;

"I have not given this company ANY of my personal information. I have
never had any contact with this company. Receiving text messages like
this is very concerning as I don't know what other information they

have on me, or where they got this information”.
18.

1.

20.

Zales

Lon

23.

Q
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
An initial investigation letter was sent by the Commissioner on 12 July
2018 asking questions as to H&H’s practices, and setting out her

concerns regarding the organisation’s compliance with the DPA and

PECR. Copies of the complaints received were also sent to H&H.

The substantive response provided to the Commissioner’s initial
investigation letter on 7 August 2018 indicated that H&H had engaged
the services of third parties, which acted in succession over the period
of the alleged contravention, to send direct marketing text messages
on its behalf and that between 1 January 2018 and 26 June 2018
3,560,211 such messages were sent. It was subsequently confirmed on
21 September 2018 that the 3,560,211 messages said to have been
sent, had in fact been received by subscribers, and that 4,833,167

messages had actually been sent in total.

It was the case that H&H did not itself obtain the data or consent of the
individuals to which it intended to advertise its products. Rather, it
engaged the third parties to obtain the data and consent of the
individuals; these third parties would then also act as the senders of
the direct marketing messages which form the basis of the

Commissioner’s investigation.

The data used was obtained from four websites: getyaoffers.co.uk;
petesdeals.co.uk; prizereactor.co.uk; and myloanoffers.co.uk. The

Commissioner has reviewed the privacy policies for those sites.

In respect of getyaoffers.co.uk, H&H do not appear to be named within
the Privacy Policy. Rather, the website, whilst naming some other
organisations, primarily details a wide range of sectors about which

subscribers may receive marketing.

In respect of myloanoffers.co.uk, H&H do not appear to be named
within the Privacy Policy. Rather, there is a short list of Third Party
6
24.

25:

26.

ZF

28.

29,

Information Commissioner's Office

Partners, and an exhaustive list of sectors about which subscribers may

receive direct marketing.

In respect of the Privacy Policies for prizereactor.co.uk and
petesdeals.co.uk, it appears that H&H were named towards the end of
a list of third parties, however it does not appear that potential
subscribers were provided with an option to select which of the many
listed third parties they may wish to receive marketing about, or the
method by which they would wish to receive any marketing. It also
appears to be the case that consent to third party marketing was a
necessary condition of subscribing to the services offered by these

sites.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute
a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by H&H and, if so, whether

the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
The contravention

The Commissioner finds that H&H has contravened regulation 22 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between the dates of 1 January 2018 and 26 June 2018, H&H
instigated the transmission of 3,560,211 unsolicited communications by
means of electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of

direct marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.
30.

31.

32.

JB

34.

Gior

Information Commissioner's Office

This led to a total of 1,353 complaints being made by subscribers who

had not previously consented to receiving such marketing.

“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents
to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.
Indirect, or third party, consent can be valid but only if it is clear and
specific enough. Furthermore, the European Directive 95/46/EC defines
consent as “any freely given specific and informed indication of his
wishes by which a data subject signifies his agreement to personal data

relating to him being processed”.

Whilst H&H did not send the text messages itself, it had an agreement
with two third parties, which acted in succession over the period of
contravention, to send the messages on its behalf. The aim of the
messages was to promote H&H’s services. The Commissioner is
therefore satisfied that H&H was the instigator of the direct marketing

text messages.

As the instigator of the direct marketing text messages, it was the
responsibility of H&H to ensure that valid, albeit indirect, consent to

send those messages had been acquired.

The Commissioner’s direct marketing guidance says “organisations
need to be aware that indirect consent will not be enough for texts,
emails or automated calls. This is because the rules on electronic
marketing are stricter, to reflect the more intrusive nature of electronic

messages.”

It goes on to say that indirect consent can be valid but only if it is clear
and specific enough. Moreover, “the customer must have anticipated
that their details would be passed to the organisation in question, and

that they were consenting to messages from that organisation. This will

8
SO;

37;

38.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

depend on what exactly they were told when consent was obtained”.
This principle applies equally in cases where the “organisation” engages

a third party to send messages on its behalf.

Consent will not be “informed” if individuals do not understand what
they are consenting to. Organisations should therefore always ensure
that the language used is clear, easy to understand, and not hidden
away in a privacy policy or small print. Consent will not be valid if
individuals are asked to agree to receive marketing from “similar
organisations”, “partners”, “selected third parties” or other similar
generic description. Further, consent will not be valid where an
individual is presented with a long, seemingly exhaustive list of general
categories of organisations. In two of the four Privacy Policies disclosed
to the Commissioner, H&H were not named and the Commissioner has
been provided with no proof that they were named at the time of the
alleged contravention. As such, they appear instead to rely on
reference to a wide range of marketing sectors which the
Commissioner finds would not be sufficient to enable “informed”

consent.

Of those Policies that did name H&H, the Commissioner found that H&H
was not immediately visible to subscribers, and that in any event there
was no option for the subscriber to specifically select which third
parties they would like to receive marketing about, or to specify the

type and method of marketing they would like to receive.

It was further confirmed to the Commissioner during the investigation
that acceptance of the “T&C’s and privacy policy” was necessary and
formed a condition of subscription for the websites which further
suggests that subscribers have been denied the ability to give free and

Specific consent.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

Ad,

45.

1C O ©
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that H&H did not have the

necessary valid consent for the 3,560,211 direct marketing messages

which were sent to subscribers at its instigation.

The Commissioner is satisfied that H&H was responsible for this
contravention and has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified
above was serious. This is because between the dates of 1 January
2018 and 26 June 2018, a total of 3,560,211 direct marketing text
messages were delivered at the instigation of H&H to subscribers

without their consent.

This resulted in a total of 1,353 complaints being made via the 7726

service and to the Commissioner.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate.

The Commissioner considers that in this case H&H did not deliberately
contravene regulation 22 of PECR. That is to say that whilst H&H did
seek to instigate the sending of direct marketing to subscribers, there

appears to have been no deliberate intention on the part of H&H to

10
46.

47.

48.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

breach PECR.

The Commissioner went on to consider whether the contraventions
identified above were negligent. First, she has considered whether H&H
knew or ought reasonably to have known that there was a risk that
these contraventions would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is
met, given that the issue of unsolicited text messages has been widely
publicised by the media as being a problem. Furthermore, it would be
reasonable to expect an organisation who is registered with the ICO to
be aware of their obligations under PECR and to carry out steps of due
diligence to ensure compliance when engaging in direct marketing via

third parties.

It is therefore reasonable to suppose that H&H knew or ought
reasonably to have known that there was a risk that these

contraventions would occur.

Second, the Commissioner has considered whether H&H failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions. The Commissioner has
published detailed guidance for those carrying out direct marketing
explaining their legal obligations under PECR. This guidance explains
the circumstances under which organisations are able to carry out
marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by post, or by fax. In
particular it states that organisations can generally only send
marketing texts to individuals if that person has specifically consented
to receiving them from the sender. It also makes it clear that
particular care must be taken when relying on indirect consent and that
it is not acceptable to rely on assurances given by third party suppliers
without undertaking proper due diligence. Whilst the Commissioner has
been provided with copies of ‘Opted in Data Supply Agreements’
between H&H and its third party senders, the terms appear to be
insufficient in that it is not appropriate for H&H to seek to absolve itself

1]
49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

@
1C O O
Information Commissioner's Office
of culpability under data protection legislation by transferring its duties
of due diligence in respect of the data to the third party. Had H&H

completed the customer journey they would have seen the deficiencies

in the consents on which they were to rely.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that H&H failed to take
reasonable steps to ensure that the consents obtained were clear,

freely given, specific and valid.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that H&H failed to

take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetary penalty

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by H&H on this matter.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty

The Commissioner has considered the likely impact of a monetary
penalty on H&H. She has decided on the information that is available to
her, that H&H has access to sufficient financial resources to pay the

proposed monetary penalty without causing undue financial hardship.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of
unsolicited marketing text messages is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. The issuing of a
monetary penalty will reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that
they are only messaging those who specifically consent to receive

marketing.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £120,000 (one hundred and twenty
thousand pounds) is reasonable and proportionate given the
particular facts of the case and the underlying objective in imposing the

penalty.
60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 5 June 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
4 June 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £96,000 (ninety six thousand pounds). However, you
should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:
@

1C O @

Information Commissioner's Office
e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary

penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

66. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 3 day of May 2019

=.

a

Signed

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

hs Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

16
a)

b)

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

D)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

n)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

17
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).