Admonition The XY club in 1XX0 Vienna (hereinafter: XY club), ZVR number XXX, has been at least since the 19.04.2018 at (from - to clock) 0-24 clock in 1XX0 Vienna, XXstraße 37 as controller within the meaning of Article 4 (7) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data, on the free movement of data and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (Data Protection Act) Basic Regulation, 'the DSGVO') No. On the basis of the statement of Mr. XXX, who was to recognize the police officers in the official act of 19.04.2018 as the representative of the association, the data protection authority comes to the conclusion that the installation and operation of the two cameras by persons carried out or arranged who have acted either alone or as part of a legal person's body and have a management position within the legal entity on the basis of: 1. the power to represent the legal person, 2. the power to make decisions on behalf of the legal person, or 3. or that lack of supervision or control by any such person has enabled the installation and operation of the two cameras, by a person acting on behalf of the legal entity. GZ: D550.015 / 0003-DSB / 2018 dated 18.12.2018 [Note: Editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like), etc ., as well as their initials and abbreviations may be abbreviated and / or modified for pseudonymization reasons. The installation and operation of the cameras was initiated by persons who acted either alone or as part of an entity of the legal entity and a managerial position within the legal entity on the basis of: 1. the power to represent the legal entity, 2. the power to make decisions in the legal entity 3) have a control authority within the legal entity, or lack of supervision or control by one of the named persons has enabled the installation and operation of the two cameras by a person acting for the legal entity.