The Information Commissioner (IP) explains that online cookies need to be differentiated based on their role and invasiveness. If the cookies are placed appropriately, they do not constitute an intrusion into privacy. As is clear from the published Guidelines on the use of cookies and the numerous positions taken so far, coordinated with other data protection supervisory authorities in the EU, in the case of their own analytics, a valid visit to the website can only be considered valid, but only if the appropriate additional safeguards are accepted measures. Installation of analytical cookies is permissible for the first time when you first visit the website, provided that the operator ensures that: The restriction on the use of cookies is determined by the Electronic Communications Act, which also provides for very narrow exceptions for cookies in Article 157, which do not require consent. . This is particularly restrictive in the realm of online audience capture (web analytics), which at the same time does not necessarily imply an intrusion on privacy, if done appropriately. The new European Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulation [1], which will replace the current ZEKom-1, will also include a specific exception for its own analytics, so that operators can use it without the individual&#39;s consent. Also, in January 2019, IP enabled its website www.ip-rs.si to track website traffic through Matomo (formerly Piwik) web analytics. An analytic cookie is placed on the IP visitor on the first visit. It is an online platform on the basis of which the European Commission has designed its own Europa Analytics solution for all Commission-controlled websites, the same service being recommended and used by the French Data Protection Supervisor (CNIL). The solution used allows local storage of data on an IP-controlled server, which means that visitor data is not passed on to third parties, and recommended security requirements were implemented, such as: Do Not Track (automated IP anonymization) address, visitors do not have unique unique identifiers to allow cross-device tracking (called User ID). Visitors are offered the option of managing cookie settings on the front page, which allows the subsequent withdrawal of consent. Withdrawal is made using a new cookie that saves the user&#39;s choice. [1] The draft currently in force is available on the European Commission&#39;s website, also in the English translation: ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/proposal-regulation-privacy-and-electronic-communications.