THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

June 27, 2019

Data breaches in registration reports for election campaign
Parties (and other providers of nominations) may be required by the registration authorities
under certain conditions, data of eligible voters for personalized
Receive election advertising. This has been the case in the recent European and local elections
on a large number of complaints to the country commissioner for data protection
and freedom of information. Often, sufferers simply did not know that
Registration authorities may issue data to parties for electoral advertising if they
do not exercise their right of objection. In these cases filed
Reference to the legal situation. However, there were also massive data breaches at the registration authorities, which led to illegal data transfers. Due to errors, partial data were obtained from non-eligible persons or persons,
are registered for the transmission locks transmitted. This led to
that infants and toddlers received personalized referrals!
"Parties take a prominent role in the democratic decision-making process
Role and are therefore privileged under registration law ", emphasizes the State Representative for
the data protection and the freedom of information, Dr. Stefan Brink, in this context. The multitude of breakdowns in data transfers for the purpose of
Election advertising, however, shows an urgent need for action at the registration authorities.
Even simple organizational and technical measures, such as awareness-raising and training of employees with registration information in the run-up to elections or the use of the four-eyes principle in data processing, could help to significantly reduce such incidents. That
Citizens are annoyed about such data breaches, was completely understandable. "Less displeasure and lack of understanding among the citizens as well as targeted campaigning will ultimately help all those involved", Brink continues.
Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax +49 711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

Not only with registration reports for election purposes, but also
for data transmissions to address book publishers for the publication of address books
and to elected officials, press and radio for certain anniversaries and anniversaries
is there a legal right of opposition. This is to the registration office
exercise, does not depend on any conditions and need not be justified
become. A filed opposition is for an indefinite period, but can be withdrawn at any time.
If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
