THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

February 28, 2019

LfDI Baden-Wuerttemberg imposed fine against former Juso country chief
- Data protection is also to be considered during party work -

Because of a breach of the purpose limitation in the processing of personal data, the fine of the Land Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI) by decision of 25.02.2019 against the
former state chairman of the Jusos Baden-Württemberg a fine of
2.500, - Euro imposed.
Further allegations regarding the handling of member data by the state chairman and other officials of the Jusos, the country representative has also examined data protection law, but found no sanctionable violations.
The former Juso-Landesvorsitzende had in advance of the so-called "small state party convention" of the SPD Baden-Württemberg, which took place on 28.04.2018, from the former
Juso Country Executive received a list of all 168 delegates to the party convention. This list, which the Juso Country Manager had created using SPD affiliate management software, included the first and last names of the
Delegates also their age, their place of residence and the respective local and district association to which they belonged.
By e-mail dated 27.04.2018, the former Juso-Landesvorsitzende sent this list of delegates to a circle of about ten confidants, who belonged partly to the JusoLandesvorstand, but partly also held no political office. His
On this basis, confidants were supposed to convey to the Juso provincial governor an opinion on a housing application submitted for the state party convention. For this purpose, they should use the sent list with the respective delegates in their district or local association or in their respective Bekönigstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Phone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · poststelle@lfdi.bwl.de · poststelle @ lfdi.bwl.de-mail.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962
The information on collection of personal data according to Article 13 DS-GVO can be found on our homepage
(Https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/datenschutz/).

-2-

talk. The state chairman misjudged that the delegate list
only for the organizational handling of the party congress determined and the use of the list to inner-party opinion forming therefore inappropriate and thus
was inadmissible. Indications of undue influence on the delegates
However, the investigations of the LfDI did not.
Since the transmission of the list on 27.04.2018 and thus before the effective date of the EU Data Protection Regulation, the Federal Data Protection Act (BDSG) was
old version (a.F.) is decisive for the assessment of the infringement. By sending the list of delegates to his confidants, the former chairman of the Juso Landgericht has defeated the BDSG a.F. infringed and in a negligent manner unauthorized - as improper - processed personal data.
Within the applicable fine of the BDSG a.F. from up to 50,000 euros
was a fine in the amount of 2,500 euros appropriate. In favor of the former Juso-Landesvorsitzenden spoke in particular his active participation in the clarification of the facts. So he has on his own early on the supervisory authority
and the processes during his time as State Secretary,
unreservedly and credibly explained. It was also to be considered that he exercised his activities as a national chairman on a voluntary basis and that he was negligent in the infringement
committed. At his expense, however, was to see that he and his confidants
a political advantage over the other participants in the State Party Congress
who did not have access to the list of delegates and therefore could not develop political strategies in the run-up to the state party convention in the same way. In this case, it was again in favor of the former Juso-Landesvorsitzenden to consider that he sent the list of delegates only on the eve of the state party convention, so that the resulting advantage was small.
As far as the previous Juso-Landesvorsitzenden further data protection offenses were charged, there was no reason for further sanctions. For an illegitimate
The investigation of the former Juso-Landesvorsitzenden on the election of the SPD country chairman on November 24, 2018, the investigation showed no evidence. This also applies to so-called "profile formations" of party members.
Evidence of criminal offenses, including criminal behavior, was - unlike in the
Ahead of this decision publicly debated - not. As far as the LfDI goes
the question of whether and in what intensity informants themselves against data protection
have acted.
political parties
Design rooms. The internal party work, however, can not be a "blind spot" for the
Be privacy. Also between party members the data protection law works, too
Within the party, the rights and obligations of data protection must be observed. "
With regard to the handling of parties with membership data, LfDI Brink announced further clarification and training measures, it should eliminate gray areas and
to bring the party organizations up to date with the European Data Protection Regulation DS-GVO.

If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
