GZ: DSB-D123.626 / 0006-DSB / 2018 dated April 23, 2019 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] DECISION The DPA decides on the data protection complaint of Eduard A *** (complainant) of 15 October 2018 against N *** Bauträger GmbH (Respondent) for infringement of the right to Confidentiality as follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: §§ 1 (1) and (2) and 24 (1) and (5) of the Data Protection Act (DSG), BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended; § 7 of the General Land Registry Act 1955 (GBG), BGBl. Nr. 39/1955 idgF. EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM A. Arguments of the parties and procedure 1. By submission of 15 October 2018, the applicant alleged infringement of the right to secrecy. The appellant summarized that he had received from the Respondent a letter expressing his interest in the purchase of a property owned by the complainant. 2. By observations dated 16 November 2018, the Respondent summarized that it specializes in the development of real estate, including the management of residential projects, and in particular the acquisition of real estate. The acquisition of suitable project sites and objects is essential for the development of projects and for the realization of the company purpose. The Respondent contacted the complainant once by post. According to the wording of the law, generally available data are expressly excluded from the scope of protection under Section 1 (1) of the DSG. The personal data in question had been collected from the land register, which is why there was no identifiable interest of the complainant to be protected. Furthermore, the Respondent has a legitimate interest under Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO on the processing of publicly available, land register data for direct marketing purposes. In case of notification that the person no longer wishes to be enrolled, the Respondent will delete the data of the person concerned. 3. The complainant replicated - according to the parties to the findings of the preliminary investigation - in his statement of 21 December 2018, summarizing that he had received such letters on an ongoing basis but from different senders. It was therefore interesting to find out whether such submissions were legal. B. Object of the complaint On the basis of the appellant's allegation, the subject of the complaint is the question whether the Respondent infringed the complainant's right to confidentiality by collecting the complainant's personal data from the Land Register and subsequently using that data, to contact the complainant by post for the purpose of acquiring possession of a property belonging to the appellant. C. Determination of facts The Respondent is a real estate trustee. The business of the Respondent includes i.a. also the purchase and management of (agricultural) land. Evaluation of evidence: The findings made are based on a excerpt from the register of the company and on a GISA extract (both retrieved on April 19, 2019). The Respondent has queried the Austrian land register in 1 *** Vienna, W * gasse * 6, KGNr: 0 * 5 * 3, EZ: ** 3 and in this way has learned the complainant's contact details. Subsequently, the Respondent used the data collected from the Austrian land register (land register excerpt) in order to contact the complainant once by post for the purpose of the possible acquisition of the aforementioned property. The complainant's contact details were not used elsewhere. Assessment of evidence: The findings made are based on the credible opinion of the Respondent dated 16 November 2018. Furthermore, the Respondent's arguments were not disputed in the complainant's further opinion of 21 December 2018. D. From a legal point of view it follows: 1. In the present case, this is personal data from the land register (land register extract), which is publicly accessible according to § 7 Abs. 1 GBG. However, the fact that the land register is a public register means, according to the established case law of the Supreme Court, that anyone can inspect it and receive copies of it, in return for reimbursement, but does not mean that it has to be removed from the register Facts are generally known or even just legal (see RIS RS0111112). For this reason, it is not possible to speak simply of generally available data within the meaning of Section 1 (1) of the DSG. 2. According to the Rsp of the DPA, the very general assumption of non-infringement of legitimate confidentiality interests for data published in a permissible manner is incompatible with the provisions of the GDPR (see the decision of 15 January 2019, DC DSB-D123.527 / 0004-DSB / 2018 with regard to § 27 para 1 ÄrzteG 1998 and the decision dated 31 October 2018, DC DSB-D123.076 / 0003-DSB / 2018 mwN). 3. It should also be borne in mind that the present use of personal data in the land register is not limited to mere reproduction. Insofar as legitimately published data are not merely reproduced, but a new element is linked to this data - such as the creation of informational added value (see the decision of 15 January 2019 supra to create a "physician assessment platform") or objectively the use the data on the possible acquisition of real estate in the context of the business as real estate trustee -, this link is a processing in accordance with Art. 4 Z 2 DSGVO. Such a link always requires an authorization requirement according to Art. 6, 9 or 10 GDPR (cf the legal position according to DSG 2000 Kotschy in Jahnel (eds), Data Protection Law and E-Government Yearbook 2012, 27 [47], according to which by a combination of publicly available data with other data, the permissibility of their use is to be completely re-examined). 4. The Respondent in the present case has legitimate interests under Art. 6 para. 1 lit. f DSGVO to the meeting. It should be recalled that an infringement of the right to secrecy was allegedly substantiated, which is why the admissibility or the balancing of interests must be checked in accordance with the requirements under § 1 DSG, whereby also according to paragraph 2 leg. Cit. legitimate interests of another may be considered as limiting the secrecy claim. 5. Due to the fact that the personal data of the complainant are already publicly available in the land register and it evidently does not constitute data worthy of special protection within the meaning of § 1 (2) second sentence DSG or sensitive data within the meaning of Art. 9 DSGVO and also none In principle, a lower level of protection is to be assumed (see, for example, the decision of the German Federal Court of Justice of 23 September 2014 on the GZ VI ZR 358/13 mwN, which depends on the sphere - for example "social sphere"). and "professional sphere" - based on different degrees of legitimacy, these considerations also being transferrable to data belonging to the public sphere). 6. In the present case, the personal data from the land register was used by the Respondent to contact the complainant only once by post and, as stated, this data was not otherwise used. A disproportionate use of data therefore does not exist, according to the data protection authority. Incidentally, the complainant did not bring any legitimate secrecy interests into the meeting. 7. On the other hand, the Respondent's interest as a real estate trustee, i.a. through acquisition and the management of (agricultural) land continuously to acquire new properties or land that are in their view of economic interest. Furthermore, the Respondent also offered to delete the complainant's personal data or to refrain from further contact (see Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 06/2014 on the notion of legitimate interest of the controller pursuant to Article 7 of Directive 95) / 46 / EC, WP 217, 844/14 / EN, p. 43, according to which the implementation of protective measures for a data subject may contribute to a balancing of interests in favor of the responsible person). 8. Overall, therefore, the DPA concludes that, due to the balance of interests involved, there is no breach of secrecy as the respondent's legitimate interests as real estate trustee outweigh the prejudice to the complainant's legitimate interests (§ 1 (2) DSG). 9. It was therefore to decide according to the award.
