GZ: DSB-D123.800 / 0001-DSB / 2018 dated 28.11.2018 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The Data Protection Authority decides on the data protection complaint made by Mag. Harald V *** (Complainant) of 20 November 2018 against the Austrian Parliament, National Council of Inquiry (Respondent) Infringement in the right to secrecy and deletion as follows: - The appeal is rejected. Legal basis: §§ 1 and 6 General Administrative Procedure Act 1991 - AVG, BGBl. Nr. 51/1991 idgF; §§ 4 (1) and 35 (2) of the Data Protection Act - DSG, BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended; Art. 77 General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR, OJ No. L 119, p.1; Articles 24 and 53 of the Federal Constitutional Law - B-VG, BGBl. Nr. 1/1930 as amended; §§ 31 ff, § 38 and § 19 of Annex 1 to the Rules of Procedure 1975 - GOG, BGBl. Nr. 410/1975 idgF. EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM A. Arguments of the parties and procedural method By submission of 20.11.2018, the complainant alleged that he testified before the National Council in the *** Committee of Inquiry and that the minutes of the statement, although three years had passed, were still published. It concerns personal data that are particularly sensitive to publication. He had requested the deletion of the data and the request for cancellation had been rejected. B. From a legal point of view: although the GDPR does not simply deny the supervision of data protection supervisory authorities over bodies of legislation other than through courts in the context of judicial activity (Article 55 (3)), that is the European legal order the separation of state powers inherent. A control of the administration (executive) over the legislation (Legislative) is excluded. The National Council and its committees are the bodies through which the legislative authority (together with the Bundesrat) is exercised at the federal level. The National Council is authorized to carry out investigations into completed events in the area of ​​federal enforcement (Art. 24 and Art. 53 para. 2 B-VG). The committee of inquiry, in which the complainant testified and in which the statement was recorded, is thus an organ, which is attributable to the state authority legislation. The data protection authority is responsible for the supervision of compliance with the provisions of the DSGVO and the DSG pursuant to Art. 77 DSGVO in conjunction with §§ 4 and § 35 (2) DSG. By way of exception, the Data Protection Authority is also responsible for the supervision of legislative bodies - insofar as provided for in the constitutional provision of § 35 (2) of the DSG - for individual administrative matters of specific bodies of legislation. To an extent beyond that, legislative control by an executive body, such as the Managing Authority Data Protection Authority, is not provided for. As mentioned above, committees of inquiry and record keeping of evidence (Article 19 of Annex 1 to the GOG, VO-UA) are tasks of legislative control over the administration and are therefore not subject to the jurisdiction of the DPA. The data protection authority has to exercise its competence ex officio and at every stage of the procedure (§ 1 and § 6 Abs. 1 AVG). As the minutes referred to by the appellant are to be assigned to a legislative body in the field of (constitutionally) conferred jurisdiction, the complaint had to be dismissed on grounds of lack of jurisdiction.
