GZ: DSB-D123.589 / 0002-DSB / 2019 dated April 9, 2019 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] APPEALS The Data Protection Authority decides on the data protection complaint of Emilia A *** (Complainant) dated 8 October 2018 against N *** Bauprojekt GmbH (Respondent) for infringement of the right to Confidentiality as follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: §§ 1 (1) and (2), 24 (1) and (5) of the Data Protection Act (DSG), BGBl. I No. 165/1999 as amended; Art. 4 item 1 and Art. 6 para. 1 lit. b of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR), OJ 1. Statement of reasons A. Arguments of the parties and procedural step 1. By submitting an application of 8 October 2018, the appellant alleged infringement of the right to secrecy pursuant to Paragraph 1 of the DSG and summarized in that regard: the Respondent is a developer with whom she and her husband have concluded a contract of work. Meanwhile, she has taken over a house with numerous shortcomings. The Respondent passes on to all of its "SUB Companies" the Respondent's telephone number to make appointments and to discuss deficiencies and their remedies. There is an upright contractual relationship with the Respondent. As the general contractor, these had to agree the deadlines and also communicate the shortcomings to their subcontractors. The Respondent has no "release" to forward the complainant's telephone or e-mail address. In the meantime, the complainant's name and telephone number had been passed on to all suppliers in list form. 2. By observations of 22 October 2018, the Respondent stated in its complaint that, in 2016, a contract for the construction of a home with the complainant had been concluded. In the course of the transfer warranty claims of the complainant were asserted. The exporting companies were informed that they had an appointment with the complainant to remedy the defect. Since these warranty claims arise directly from the contract, the transfer of contact to the companies is part of the contract. 3. By supplementary opinion dated 24 January 2019, the Respondent submitted the procedural agreement on work. 4. The Appellant did not make use of the opportunity to give an opinion within the framework of the party hearing in accordance with § 45 (3) AVG, and did not comment further in the proceedings. B. Object of Appeal The subject of the complaint is the question of whether the Respondent infringed the Appellant's right to confidentiality by submitting the Appellant's name, e-mail address and telephone number to executing companies in the course of correcting the defect. C. Determination of facts On 3 August 2016, the complainant concluded a contract of employment with the Respondent for the construction of a house on a designated property. It was agreed that the Respondent provided all services from planning to construction of the house. Under "1.3. Contractual basis ", it was also agreed that the Respondent may, in whole or in part, have the services rendered to her - without prejudice to its responsibility towards the complainant - be carried out by other companies. In the contract of work under "7. Warranty "The following is agreed:" The warranty period is 3 years from delivery. The client [client] expressly declares that he [the contractor] or a company or expert commissioned by him / her to grant access to the building for the purposes of inspection of defects and rectification of defects. Substantial deficiencies which the contractor is responsible for within the scope of the warranty will be remedied within a reasonable period of time (...) ". The complainant asserted numerous deficiencies in the Respondent within the framework of the warranty under the contract for work. The Respondent used the services of some other companies (hereinafter "exporting companies") transferred from the service contract. The Respondent provided the executing company with the name, e-mail address and telephone number of the complainant. The complainant's e-mail address is "emilia.a***@***mail.org". Nominated exporting companies have contacted the complainant at least in the period 25 and 28 September 2019 and 4 and 5 October 2018 concerning the correction of the deficiencies. Assessment of evidence: The findings concerning the contract for work and the associated remedying of defects and communication between the executing company and the complainant arise from the parties' identical statements in their letters to the data protection authority and the enclosed work contract. D. From a legal point of view it follows: According to § 1 DSG everyone, especially with regard to respect for their private and family life, is entitled to secrecy of the personal data concerning him, as far as there is a legitimate interest. Such an interest should be denied if data are not accessible to a secrecy claim due to their general availability or their lack of traceability to the data subject. Insofar as the use of personal data also does not occur in the vital interest of the data subject or with his consent, restrictions on the claim to confidentiality in accordance with paragraph 2 leg. Cit. moreover, it is permissible only for the protection of the predominant legitimate interests of another. The name, the e-mail address containing the name and surname of the person concerned and the telephone number are personal data pursuant to Art. 4 no. 1 DSGVO. The secrecy of these personal data is in principle an objection worthy of protection because neither claims have been made nor revealed in the proceedings that these data are generally available. However, according to section 1 (2) of the DSG, the overwhelming legitimate interests of another party may provide for the restriction of the right to secrecy: for example, the processing of personal data pursuant to Article 6 (1) lit. b first case DSGVO et al. then lawful if the processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is a party. For the fulfillment of the contract, the provision does not distinguish between principal and ancillary obligations, but presupposes that the data subject as a contracting party participates in the establishment of a legal relationship. As a legal basis for processing, the contract must be effective and, in any event, must not suffer from legal deficiencies leading to its nullity. For the fulfillment of a contract, processing is only necessary if it is necessary and not only useful for the fulfillment of the specific purposes of the contract. This is the case, for example, with the communication of credit card details for the settlement of the payment of an online purchase, the address of the customer for the contractual correspondence or delivery or the specification of the bank account for the salary transfer (see Ehmann / Selmayr [Hrsg], Datenschutz- Basic Regulation [Vienna 2017], Art. 6, para. 13). Insofar as the person responsible is not himself involved in the contract, the contracting party must have at least turned it on in the initiation or execution of the contract ("transfer of functions"), in order to ensure that Art. 6 para. 1 lit. b DSGVO can justify the processing. A balance of interests is required for para. 1 lit. b leg. cit. Not. In general, it should be necessary in particular for the execution and execution of the contract to collect, record, store, organize and, if necessary, use contact data of the contracting party (see Sydow [Hrsg], European Data Protection Regulation [2nd edition, Vienna 2018]). , Art. 6, marginal 18 ff). In this case, the complainant has concluded a contract with the Respondent. In it was u.a. agrees that the performance of the Respondent may be provided, in whole or in part, by any exporting company and, in the present case, this has been done. This involved the contractors in the execution of the contract. Part of the fulfillment of the contract also covers the correction of defects within the scope of the warranty. The disclosure of the contact details of the Appellant by the Respondent in the context of the fulfillment of the procedural contract of work was therefore beyond doubt as required by the above. Against this background, there is a permissible restriction of the claim to confidentiality of the complainant's personal data, which is why the complaint proves to be unjustified and had to be dismissed pursuant to Section 24 (5) DSG.
