Interceptions and technology, the dangers to avoid Intervention by Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (&quot;Il Messaggero&quot;, 24 May 2019) The recent developments of the &quot;Exodus case&quot; re-propose, under different aspects, the theme of interceptions . The news of the access to the records of hundreds of investigations and the interception of as many citizens completely unrelated to investigations demonstrates the degree of dangerousness of investigative tools based, as in the case of Trojans, on particularly invasive technologies. On the one hand, in fact, the software used for these purposes presents an intrinsic danger, being able to &quot;concentrate&quot;, in a single act, a plurality of investigative tools, in some cases leaving no traces or altering the acquired data. Thus, ubiquitous surveillance is carried out, whenever these sensors are installed on mobile devices, which accompany us in every moment of life. Due to their own characteristics, therefore, the Trojans, escaping the traditional legal-procedural categories, risk circumventing the essential guarantees underlying the evidential acquisition regime in the prosecuting systems. Moreover, if the decisive evidence is vitiated, after its acquisition, the entire procedural result that is based on it risks being overwhelmed. A further critical element is, on the other hand, the externalization of these investigative operations, due to their high &quot;technologisation&quot; rate. In fact, this makes the supply chain on which the investigative activity unfolds much more permeable, involving a plurality of subjects and often lacking the professional, organizational and even reliability requirements necessary to carry out such a delicate activity as intercepting . Thus, even the most rigorous compliance by the judicial offices with the security measures indicated by us to protect the confidentiality of the data intercepted is likely to be completely nullified by the assignment of captive operations to inadequate companies whose compliance is not always easy to verify, given the multiplicity of subjects to which each Public Prosecutor has the power to address. The fragmentation of the investigative process and the delegation of its important segments to private parties inevitably increases their vulnerabilities, with damages that are often irreparable not only for the private life of citizens, but also for the effectiveness of the investigative action. Cases such as those of Exodus and, first, Hacking Team show how deficiencies (negligent or, worse, malicious) in security measures to protect data threaten to transform the interceptive means - in itself valuable - into a dangerous tool of massive dossieraggio. Especially when - as in the case of Exodus - software connected to apps is used, such as those placed on platforms and accessible to all and not directly inoculated in the suspect&#39;s device alone. If made available on the market in the absence - malicious or negligent - of the filters necessary to limit the acquisition by third parties, these apps risk, in fact, turning into extremely dangerous massive espionage tools. It is therefore unavoidable - as we have indicated, even recently, to the legislator - a regulatory intervention that strengthens the guarantees envisaged on the point by the (currently suspended) &quot;Orlando&quot; reform, countering above all the risks connected to the involvement of different subjects in the &quot;chain&quot; of investigations. On a terrain that crosses the investigative power and that, no less strong, of technology, guarantees are indispensable: never as in this case, in fact, do they constitute the form and substance of democracy.