To:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissloner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 2018
PART 6, SECTION 149

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER
ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

DATED: 21 June 2019

Chief Constable of the Metropolitan Police Service

Metropolitan Police Service,
Victoria Embankment,
Westminster,

London

SW1A 2IJL

The Metropolitan Police Service (“MPS”) is a “controller” as variously defined
in sections 3(6), 5 and of the Data Protection Act 2018 (“the DPA”) and
Article 4(7) of the General Data Protection Regulation (“the GDPR”). The MPS
is the territorial police force responsible for law enforcement in the
Metropolitan Police District. It processes personal data in the course of

carrying out its functions.

The Information Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) has decided to issue
the controller with an Enforcement Notice under section 149 DPA. The Notice
is in relation to contraventions of Article 15 GDPR, and is thought to also
extend to contraventions of Part 3, Chapter 3 of the DPA. This Notice is

accordingly issued under section 149(2)(b) DPA.

This Notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

1
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Legislative Framework

4.

The DPA contains enforcement provisions in Part 6 which are exercisable by

the Commissioner.
Section 149 DPA materially provides:

"(1) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has failed, or is
failing, as described in subsection (2), (3), (4) or (5), the
Commissioner may give the person a written notice (an “enforcement
notice”) which requires the person—

(a) to take steps specified in the notice, or

(b) to refrain from taking steps specified in the notice,
or both (and see also sections 150 and 151).

(2) The first type of failure is where a controller or processor has failed,
or is failing, to comply with any of the following—
(a) ...
(b) a provision of Articles 12 to 22 of the GDPR or Part 3 or 4 of
this Act conferring rights on a data subject;

(C) ...;
(d) ...;
(@) ....

(6) An enforcement notice given in reliance on subsection (2), (3) or
(5) may only impose requirements which the Commissioner considers

appropriate for the purpose of remedying the failure.”

Section 150 DPA materially provides:

"(1) An enforcement notice must—

2
Information Commissioner's Office

(a) state what the person has failed or is failing to do, and
(b) give the Commissioner’s reasons for reaching that opinion.

(2) In deciding whether to give an enforcement notice in reliance on
section 149(2), the Commissioner must consider whether the failure
has caused or is likely to cause any person damage or distress.

(3) In relation to an enforcement notice given in reliance on section
149(2), the Commissioner’s power under section 149(1)(b) to require a
person to refrain from taking specified steps includes power—
(a) to impose a ban relating to all processing of personal data, or
(b) to impose a ban relating only to a specified description of
processing of personal data, including by specifying one or more
of the following—
(i) a description of personal data;
(ii) the purpose or manner of the processing;
(iii) the time when the processing takes place.

(4) An enforcement notice may specify the time or times at which, or
period or periods within which, a requirement imposed by the notice
must be complied with (but see the restrictions in subsections (6) to

(8)).”

Chapter 3 of the GDPR makes provision for the rights afforded to data
subjects. These include the rights of subject access, rectification, erasure and

restriction of processing.
Specifically Chapter 3, Article 15 materially provides:

"(1) the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller

confirmation as to whether or not personal data concerning him or her

3
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

are being processed, and, where that is the case, access to the

personal data and the following information:

(a)
(D)
(Cc)

(d)

(e)

(f)
(9)

(A)

the purposes of the processing;

the categories of personal data concerned;

the recipients or categories of recipient to whom the
personal data have been or will be disclosed, in particular
recipients in third countries or international organisations;
where possible, the envisaged period for which the
personal data will be stored, or, if not possible, the criteria
used to determine that period;

the existence of the right to request from the controller
rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of
processing of personal data concerning the data subject or
to object to such processing;

the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority;
where the personal data are not collected from the data
subject, any available information as to their source;

the existence of automated decision-making, including
profiling, referred to in Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in
those cases, meaningful information about the logic
involved, as well as the significance and the envisaged
consequences of such processing for the data subject.

(3) the controller shall provide a copy of the personal data undergoing

processing. For any further copies requested by the data subject, the

controller may charge a reasonable fee based on administrative costs.

Where the data subject makes the request by electronic means, and

unless otherwise requested by the data subject, the information shall

be provided in a commonly used electronic form.

4
10.

11.

12.

13.

Information Commissioner's Office

uy

Chapter 3, Article 23 sets out the restrictions which may apply to the scope
of the obligations and rights provided for in Article 15.

Part 3 of the DPA concerns Law Enforcement Processing.

Section 29 DPA states that Part 3 applies to:

"(1)(a) the processing by a competent authority of personal data
wholly or partly by automated means, and

(b) the processing by a competent authority otherwise than by
automated means of personal data which forms part of a filing
system or is intended to form part of a filing system.”

The controller in this instance is a “competent authority” as defined under

Schedule 7, Paragraph 6.

Section 45 of the DPA provides that:

"(1) A data subject is entitled to obtain from the controller—

(a) confirmation as to whether or not personal data concerning
him or her is being processed, and

(b) where that is the case, access to the personal data and the
information set out in subsection (2).

(2) That information is—
(a) the purposes of and legal basis for the processing;
(b) the categories of personal data concerned;
(c) the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the

personal data has been disclosed (including recipients or

5
Information Commissioner’s Office

categories of recipients in third countries or international
organisations);

(d) the period for which it is envisaged that the personal data will
be stored or, where that is not possible, the criteria used to
determine that period;

(e) the existence of the data subject's rights to request from the
controller—

(i) rectification of personal data (see section 46), and

(ii) erasure of personal data or the restriction of its
processing (see section 47);

(f) the existence of the data subject's right to lodge a complaint
with the Commissioner and the contact details of the
Commissioner;

(g) communication of the personal data undergoing processing
and of any available information as to its origin.

(3) Where a data subject makes a request under subsection (1), the
information to which the data subject is entitled must be provided in
writing —

(a) without undue delay, and

(b) in any event, before the end of the applicable time period (as
to which see section 54).

(4) The controller may restrict, wholly or partly, the rights conferred by
subsection (1) to the extent that and for so long as the restriction is,
having regard to the fundamental rights and legitimate interests of the
data subject, a necessary and proportionate measure to—

(a) avoid obstructing an official or legal inquiry, investigation or
procedure;

(b) avoid prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties;
O
] C O O
Information Commissioner's Office
(c) protect public security;

(d) protect national security;

(e) protect the rights and freedoms of others.

(5) Where the rights of a data subject under subsection (1) are
restricted, wholly or partly, the controller must inform the data subject
in writing without undue delay—

(a) that the rights of the data subject have been restricted,
(b) of the reasons for the restriction,

(c) of the data subject's right to make a request to the
Commissioner under section 51,

(d) of the data subject's right to lodge a complaint with the
Commissioner, and

(e) of the data subject's right to apply to a court under section
167.

(6) Subsection (5)(a) and (b) do not apply to the extent that the
provision of the information would undermine the purpose of the
restriction.

(7) The controller must—

(a) record the reasons for a decision to restrict (whether wholly
or partly) the rights of a data subject under subsection (1), and

(b) if requested to do so by the Commissioner, make the record
available to the Commissioner

Background of the case

14. The controller has previously outlined in correspondence to the
Commissioner that it has received an unprecedented rise in demand by the
public for access to data since the introduction of the DPA in May 2018.

a
15.

16.

1?

18.

19.

20.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

In a report dated 17 April 2019 the controller indicated that it was currently
processing 1,535 ‘right of access requests’ (referred to herewith as “subject
access requests”) which it had received since 25 May 2018, and that “over
94%” of those were outside of the statutory time frame for a response.

By 29 April 2019 the controller had indicated that it had 1,513 such requests
open, and that 91.5% of those were over the statutory deadline for a

response, i.e., 1,385 subject access requests overdue for a response.

This figure has been subsequently updated in the course of periodic reports
from the MPS, and as of 13 June 2019 stands at 1,727 open subject access
requests, with 1,169 of those being overdue for a response; and 689 of those
being over 100 days old.

The controller has suggested that, in light of steps taken to increase staffing
so as to deal with the backlog and the general increase in subject access
requests, it expects to be able to demonstrate an “overall backlog reduction”
by 30 September 2019.

The fluctuating backlog is a cause of significant concern for the
Commissioner, and demonstrates that the controller is currently failing to
adhere to its obligations in respect of the information rights of the individuals
for whom it processes data. Previous meetings and protracted
correspondence between the controller and Commissioner have proven
ineffective and so it has been determined that an Enforcement Notice is

required to encourage compliance.

The Commissioner considered, as she is required to do under section 150(2)
DPA when deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice, whether any
contravention has caused or is likely to cause any person damage or distress.
The Commissioner takes the view that damage or distress is likely as a result
21.

22.

23

24.

O

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
of the 1,169 individuals being denied the opportunity of properly
understanding what personal data may be being processed about them by

the controller; furthermore they are unable to effectively exercise the various
other rights statutorily afforded to a data subject in respect of that data.

Having regard to the significant level of the contravention, the Commissioner
considers that this Enforcement Notice is the proportionate regulatory step to
bring the controller into compliance.

In view of the above, and in exercise of her powers under section 149(2)(b)
DPA, the Commissioner requires the controller to take the steps specified in
Annex 1 of this Notice.

In addition, the controller is requested to continue to provide formal progress
updates to the Commissioner on a fortnightly basis to allow progress in
respect of the outstanding subject access requests to be monitored.

Furthermore, the controller is advised to ensure that the current and
prospective individuals who make subject access requests are aware of any
delays in operational practice that may affect their statutory rights.
Processes should be put in place to keep individuals informed and recovery
plans should be published or publicised to allow the public to understand how
the situation is being addressed.

Consequences of failing to comply with this Enforcement Notice

25.

If a person fails to comply with an Enforcement Notice the Commissioner
may serve a penalty notice on that person under section 155(1)(b) DPA
requiring payment of an amount up to 20 million Euros, or 4% of an

undertaking’s total annual worldwide turnover whichever is the higher.
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Right of Appeal

26. By virtue of section 162(1)(c) DPA, there is a right of appeal against this
Notice to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights). Information about your
right of appeal is set out in the attached Annex 2.

Dated the 21°t day of June 2019.

Signed: ....

 

Suzanne Gordon

Director of Data Protection Complaints and Compliance
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 SAF

10
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1

TERMS OF THE ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

THIS NOTICE REQUIRES THE CONTROLLER TO TAKE THE FOLLOWING
STEPS:

1) By no later than 30 September 2019, to have informed the individuals

2

eee

referred to in paragraph 17 who have made subject access requests whether
or not the controller is processing personal data concerning those individuals,
and if so provide the individuals with a copy of their data, subject only to the
proper application of any exemption from, or modification to, the right of
subject access provided for in or by virtue of the GDPR or DPA respectively.

Furthermore, by 30 September 2019 at the latest, the controller is to carry
out such changes to its internal systems, procedures and policies as are
necessary to ensure that future subject access requests received by the
controller, in respect of the controller, pursuant to Article 15 GDPR, and
section 45 of the DPA, are identified and complied with in accordance with
the requirements of Article 15 GDPR, and section 45 of the DPA, subject only
to the proper application of any exemption from, or modification to, the right
of subject access provided for in or by virtue of the GDPR or DPA

respectively.

3) Continue to use its best endeavours to surpass the milestones referred to in

paragraphs 1) and 2) above.

11
ICO.

information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 2

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

lis Section 162(1)(c) of the Data Protection Act 2018 gives any person
upon whom an enforcement notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the “Tribunal”) against the
notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

J If an appeal is brought this Notice need not be complied with pending
determination or withdrawal of that appeal. Information about the appeals
process may be obtained from:

First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
GRC & GRP Tribunals

PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

Tel: 0300 1234504

Fax: 0870 739 5836

Email: GRC@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk

Website: www. justice.gov.uk/tribunals/general-regulatory-chamber

12
Information Commissioner's Office

Any Notice of Appeal should be served on the Tribunal within 28 calendar
days of the date on which this Notice is sent.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 162 and 163
of the Data Protection Act 2018, and the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).