1 REVIEW PPN-01-408 / 2018 Sofia, June 27, 2019 The Commission for Personal Data Protection (CPDP, the Commission), chaired by - Ventsislav Karadjov and members: Tsanko Tsolov, Tsvetelin Sofroniev and Veselin Tselkov at a regular meeting held on May 22, 2019 and objectified in Minutes No. 22 / May 22, 2019, based on Art. 10, para. 1 of the Personal Data Protection Act (LPPD) in conjunction with Art. 57, § 1, b. 'F' by Regulation (EU) 2016/679, considered the merits of the complaint with Reg. No. PPN-01-408 / 05.06.2016, filed by G.G. against the Co-operative Association (CC) PBB. The administrative procedure is in accordance with Art. 38 of the LPPD. The complainant appealed to the Commission for Personal Data Protection with a complaint stating that, after having consulted the Commercial Register of the Ministry of Justice, she had found that her personal data had been processed and disseminated by the Co-operative Association PBB. . Mrs. G.G.K. shares that contrary to the provision of Art. 2, para. 2 of ZTRRLNC, the register published her three names, the unique civilian number (PIN), which was the responsibility of the cooperative association, since they had disclosed her personal data in a public register. The applicant stated that the data could be found in the commercial register in the case of the cooperative association. The annual statements of D2 shall be accompanied by up-to-date excerpts from the cooperator's book, with its name under serial number ****, with membership number ****, on the lists. According to the applicant, the cooperative association processes her personal data within the meaning of Art. 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and the principles for the processing of personal data have been breached. It indicates that it did not consent to the processing of her personal data and that the purposes for which her personal data were processed were not clear and that they were not processed in a way that guarantees an adequate level of security and was not given information in the meaning of of Art. 13 and Art. 14 of the Regulation. In the context of the administrative process involved in the administrative process and the obligation of the administrative body for the official gathering of evidence and 2 clarification of the actual facts relevant to the case of the letter ex. No. PPN-01-408 # 1 / 15.06.2018 of CPDP, to the Co-operative Association “PBP” was given a deadline for a written opinion on the subject of the complaint and presentation of relevant evidence. In response, an opinion was submitted stating that Ms. GGK. was a member - cooperator in the BCPB CS since February 22, 2002. Its membership relationship was terminated / due to exclusion / by a decision of the General Assembly - of the Constitutional Court, held on February 19, 2016, and the said decision of The General Meeting was published in the Commercial Register in the Commercial Register in July 2016. It is stated that in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of the Commercial Register Act, a decision of the General Meeting is obligatory when depositing applications A7 or D2 applicable to cooperatives. of the cooperative, current excerpt from the member's book - cooperatives, attendance list shafts of the OS. Exactly in connection with these requirements, when submitting applications to the Commercial Register, the aforementioned statements from the member's book - the cooperators, in which the data of Mrs. G.G.K. They say that after her exclusion in 2016, her name does not appear. They informed that the provision of Art. 2, para. 2 of the STDLNT, does indeed prohibit the publication of personal data of persons, but this provision has been in force since 01.01.2018, and the legislator did not envisage it to be applied retroactively, which means that it could not be applied for published personal data of a cooperative member for previous periods. They further indicated that the applicant's data did indeed appear in the CC's account in a commercial register, but until 2016, when it was excluded from the CC. It was in connection with these her objections and complaints about the disclosure of her personal data that they filed a Commercial Register with the Registry Agency for deletion of the personal data of the persons on all the applications and documents submitted by them, but did not receive a reply. They consider it unnecessary for the applicant's consent to the processing of her personal data, since, after the date of her exclusion and her deletion from the list of cooperative members, she appears in the CS system only as a debtor. They consider the complaint unfounded. With the letter ex. No. PPN-01-408 (18) # 11 / 16.04.2019, the Executive Director of the Registry Agency was requested information on the basis of the provision of Art. 44 of the APC to clarify the factual file. In response, an opinion was filed filed with Reg. No. PPN-01-408 # 15 (18) /08.05.2019, in which the Registry Agency informs that according to the content of Art. 2, para. 1 of the Commercial and Non-Profit Legal Entities Act (ZTRRLNC) 3 Legal Definition, the Commercial and the Non-Profit Corporate Register (TRRLNC) are a common electronic database including the circumstances entered by law, and acts declared by law for traders and branches of foreign traders, non-profit legal entities and branches of foreign non-profit legal entities. Pursuant to Art. 11, para. 1 TRRULNTS The TRRUNLS database is public and everyone has the right to free and free access to it. In view of the fact that the legislator provided that the database of the business register should contain information about the circumstances to be entered, the acts to be notified and the documents on the basis of which the entries and announcements are made, since the security of commercial turnover depends from the ability of citizens and organizations to make prompt and reliable inquiries about the circumstances and documents on the basis of which the entries were made. By virtue of the regulations of the Registry Agency, the obligation to provide access to all documents on the basis of which entries, deletions and announcements are made to third parties, state bodies, local self-government bodies and local administration, persons to whom it is entrusted entrusted with the exercise of public office. In Art. 2, para. 3 of ZTRRLNT states that a case is filed electronically for a trader and a branch of a foreign trader and for a non-profit legal entity and a branch of a foreign non-profit legal entity. The application shall be accompanied by applications, documents certifying the circumstances, the enacted acts and other documents, which may also contain personal data. The Agency shall provide registered access to the case of the trader or the non-profit legal entity. The access may be granted at the territorial units of the Agency upon submission of an application and identity document. The person requesting access electronically should be identified by electronic signature or by a digital certificate issued by the Agency (Art. 11 of the Law on Access to Information). They inform that upon inspection it was found that a person named GGK. has not been entered and has not been entered into the TRRILC maintained by the Registry Agency. When a search was carried out at TRNLNC for an individual, it was found that at the moment regarding the person GGK. there is no data in the information system of the Commercial Register and the Non-Profit Institutions Register is entered and has not been entered. Upon examination in the case of the account of the Co-operation "PBP" with UIC ***** it was found that in part of the documents attached to the case under Art. 2, para. 3 4 ZTRRLIONTS, the name of GGK is given, and the EGN is indicated, but access to them is not free but registered. Complaint with Reg. No. PPN-01-408 / 05.06.2018 contains the requisite requisites, specified in the provision of Art. 30, para. 1 of the Rules of Procedure of the Commission for the Protection of Personal Data and of its Administration (PDTCL), namely: there is data on the complainant, the nature of the request, the date and the signature, for which it is regular. The complaint is in full compliance with the requirements of CPDP, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Commission for Protection of Personal Data and its administration and contains the necessary statutory requisites for regularity. The norm of Art. 38, para. 1 of the LPPD provides for a time-limit for referral to the Commission - one year after the infringement has been recognized, but not later than five years after its commission. One year has not elapsed since the allegation of the alleged violation or five years from the commission of the alleged violation. The provisions of Art. 38, para. 1 of the LPPD deadlines were met, given par. 44, para. 2 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of the LPPD. In Art. 27, para. 2 of the APC, the legislator binds the admissibility of the request to the existence of the requirements specified in the text. The applicability of the Law on Protection of Personal Data is related to the protection of individuals in connection with the processing of their personal data by persons having the status of "data controllers" within the meaning of the legal definition of Art. 4, point 7 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. At a closed session of the Commission held on 27.03.2019, the complaint was declared admissible and an examination was called. Constituted countries: G.G.K. and Responding Party - PBP Cooperative Association, regularly notified of the open meeting scheduled for 22.05.2019. Acknowledges the fact that Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data is applicable from 25.05.2018 data and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (General Data Protection Regulation, Regulation) lays down rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data, as well as rules on the free movement of personal data. It should be noted that according to Art. 288 TFEU 'The regulation is an act of general application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. " 15, para. 2 of the Law on Regulatory 5 Acts (JA) "if a normative act is contrary to a regulation of the European Union, the regulation shall apply". The Law on Protection of Personal Data regulates the protection of the rights of individuals when processing their personal data. The purpose of the law is to guarantee privacy and privacy by ensuring the protection of individuals in the improper processing of their personal data in the process of free movement of data. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (General the Data Protection Regulation, the Regulation) governs the rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data, as well as the rules on the free movement of personal data. The purpose of the Regulation is to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals, and in particular their right to the protection of personal data. According to the legal definition given in Art. 2, para. 1 (revoked) of LPPD, personal data is any information relating to an individual who is identified or can be identified directly or indirectly by an identification number or by one or more specific attributes. The scope of the concept of personal data is further developed in Art. 4, para. 1, item 1 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 - "personal data" means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person ("data subject"); identifiable natural person is an identifiable person, directly or indirectly, in particular by identifier such as name, identification number, location data, online identifier, or by one or more physical-specific attributes, the physical, genetic, mental, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that individual. In accordance with the provision of § 1, item 4 of the Supplementary Provisions of the LPPD, the processing of personal data is a concept regulated by Art. 4, point 2 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, namely 'any operation or set of operations carried out with personal data or a set of personal data by automatic or other means such as collecting, recording, organizing, structuring, storing, adapting or modifying, retrieving, consulting, using, disclosing by transmission, distribution or any other means in which the data becomes available, sorting or combining, limiting, deleting or destroying. " 6 It is not disputed in the administrative file that Ms GGK. was a cooperative member of the PBP Cooperative Association. It should be noted that according to the provision of Art. 3, para. 3 (in the wording of SG No. 101 of December 21, 2011, effective at the date of the entry of the entry by the cooperative association) of Ordinance No. 1 on keeping and storing and accessing the commercial register and the register of non-profit legal entities, 'For a trader and a branch of a foreign trader a case is filed in electronic form, enclosing the applications, documents certifying the entered circumstances, the announced acts, the reasoned refusals and other documents, which may contain personal data for the identification of the l the representative or managing the trader in para. 4 of Art. 3 states that "The Agency shall provide registered access to the case of the trader. Access may be granted to the Agency's territorial units upon submission of an application and identity document. The person requesting electronic access should be identified by electronic signature or by a digital certificate issued by the Agency. In the provision of Art. 6 (SG 53/03 of June 27, 2014, applicable to the date of the entry by the Constitutional Court) stated that entry and deletion in the commercial register shall be made on the basis of an application in the form according to Annexes A1-A114, B1-B7, B1, B2-1, B2-2, B2-3, B2-4, B2-3, B2-3, B2-3. Notification of acts in the Commercial Register shall be made on the basis of an application in accordance with the models in Annexes D1 and D2. The retention of a company in the commercial register shall be carried out on the basis of an application in accordance with a model in accordance with Annex E1. Issuance of a certificate of legality shall be made on the basis of an application in accordance with model No E1. Implementation of the instructions under Art. 22, para. 4 of the Commercial Register Act shall be carried out on the basis of an application in accordance with a model in accordance with Annex No. G1. Where the place for filling in the applicants in the samples listed above does not reach, additional Annex H1 shall apply. A review of the necessary applications for entry indicates that they contain a requirement to complete personal data. Upon review of section IX "g" of Ordinance No. 1 on keeping and storing and accessing the commercial register and the register of non-profit legal entities - "application for registration of circumstances concerning an association", it is found that the latter is new, entered in force with SG, issue 77 of 2017, in force from 01.01.2018), item is the provision did not operate at the date of submission of the documents in the commercial register by the Cooperative Association (CC) "PBB". 7 In the light of the foregoing, it follows that the data of Ms G.G.K. have been submitted for publication in the Commercial Register to the Registry Agency in fulfillment of the statutory obligation of the administrator resulting from the provision of Art. 2, para. 2 of ZTRULNC (in the wording of SG 34/04 of 29 April 2011), in respect of which the legislator did not envisage it to be applied retroactively, which means that it could not be applied to published personal data, in fulfillment of the obligation laid down in the provision of Art. Art. 4, para. 1, item 1 (as amended by SG No. 91 of November 10, 2006) of the LPPD, in accordance with the provision of Art. 6, para. 1, b. "C" of the Regulation. Insofar as the administrative file with an opinion filed with the Reg. No. PPN-01-408 # 14 (18) /24.04.2019 is an addition that the personal data controller of the CB "PBP" stores data on the computer systems, without guaranteeing an appropriate degree of security and confidentiality, it should be stated that the allegations were not supported by the applicant's evidence. Moreover, as evident from the evidence provided between the applicant and the COP PBB, there is a civil dispute, there is an obligation for the controller to store the data until the dispute is closed. It is clear from the reasons given by Interpretative Decision No 2 of 26.06.2015 by the Supreme Court of Cassation for interpretation. No. 2/2013, OSGTC, is that both under the Law on limitation and under the Law on Protection of Persons, the limitation period is interrupted only with the initiation of proceedings in which the debtor participates. The limitation period cannot be interrupted without the debtor knowing this. All deadlines for storing documents are in compliance with the limitation period. If the statute of limitations can be interrupted without the debtor's knowledge, he or she is at risk of destroying or at the very least ceasing to keep the documents for the payment of the debt or for its repayment by other means. According to Art. 20 to Art. 23 от действащия от 1898 до 1950 г. Закон за давността тя се прекъсва по гражданска причина с подаване искова молба в съда, с призовка за доброволно плащане или с налагане секвестър или възбрана, съобщена на лицето, срещу което се иска да се прекъсне течението на давността. Тя не се счита прекъсната: ако ищецът се откаже от иска си; ако заведеното производство се унищожи по причина на прекратяването му в съда или по причина на непотърсването му в течение на 3 години; както и ако искът се отхвърли. Давността също така се прекъсва по гражданска причина, когато длъжникът признае правото на тогова, против когото тя е била започнала да тече. Съгласно чл. 116, б. „б“ ЗЗД давността се прекъсва с предявяване на иск или възражение или на искане за почване на помирително производство; ако искът или възражението или 8  искането за почване на помирително производство не бъдат уважени, давността не се смята прекъсната. От разпоредбата на чл. 38 от Данъчно – осигурителния процесуален кодекс (ДОПК) е видно, че счетоводната и търговската информация, както и всички други сведения и документи от значение за данъчното облагане и задължителните осигурителни вноски се съхраняват от задълженото лице по реда, установен в Закона за Националния архивен фонд, в следните срокове: ведомости за заплати - 50 години; счетоводни регистри и финансови отчети - 10 години; документи за данъчно-осигурителен контрол - 5 години след изтичане на давностния срок за погасяване на публичното задължение, с което са свързани; всички останали носители - 5 години. В ал. 2 на чл. 38 от ДОПК е посочено, че след изтичането на срока за съхранението им носителите на информация по ал. 1 (хартиени или технически), които не подлежат на предаване в Националния архивен фонд, могат да се унищожават. От събраните доказателства по административната преписка е видно, че членственото правотношение на жалбоподателката е прекратено на 19.02.2016 г., предвид което за Кооперативно сдружение „П.Б.П.“ не е изтекъл и срокът по чл . 38, ал. 1, т. 5 от ДОПК. Предвид  горното, на основание чл. 10, ал. 1 от Закона за защита на личните данни във връзка с чл. 57, § 1, б. „е“ от Регламента и чл. 38, ал. 3 от Закона за защита на личните данни, Комисията се произнесе със следното  Р Е Ш Е Н И Е: Оставя без уважение като неоснователна жалба с рег. № ППН-01-408/05.06.2018 г., подадена от Г.Г.К. срещу Кооперативно сдружение „П.Б.П“. Решението подлежи на обжалване в 14-дневен срок от връчването му, чрез Комисията за защита на личните данни пред Административен съд – София – град. ПРЕДСЕДАТЕЛ: ЧЛЕНОВЕ:  Венцислав Караджов /п/ Цанко Цолов /п/   Цветелин Софрониев /п/  Веселин Целков /п/
