
PFA Pension privacy breach reviews
Published 16-05-2019
Decision
Private companies
On the basis of a number of notifications of breach of the personal data security from PFA Pension, the Data Inspectorate took up a case of its own operation and now pronounces criticism.Journal number: 2019-431-0021
Summary
Given that PFA Pension per On February 8, 2019, had reported 66 breaches of the personal data security to the Danish Data Protection Agency, the Danish Data Protection Agency started its own case against PFA Pension. In its decision of 16 May, the Data Inspectorate criticized the fact that PFA Pension's processing of personal data did not take place in accordance with the rules of Article 32 of the Data Protection Regulation.
After a closer review of the received notifications, the Data Inspectorate has found that 62 out of 66 notifications relate to accidental disclosure of personal data in connection with the transmission of documents via the communication solution "My PFA", e-Box, by letter or the like. PFA Pension has stated that the 66 breaches of personal data security constitute a relatively small proportion of the total communication with the company's customers, but that the number is nevertheless too high. To this end, PFA Pension has stated that approximately 270,000 customers receive electronic or physical responses from PFA Pension annually as a result of their inquiry, and that the reported breaches of personal data security concern only 0.3 per cent of the total communication with the company's customers.
Despite DAS's criticism of PFA Pension, the Authority notes at the same time that PFA Pension continuously monitors the established level of security, and that the company, on the basis of the breaches passed, already took steps to implement additional security measures to strengthen treatment security.
Decision
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case, where the Authority has requested PFA Pension for an opinion in connection with the fact that the company per On February 8, 2019, 66 breaches of personal data security have been reported to the Authority, in particular regarding accidental disclosure of personal data.
1. Decision
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that there are grounds for criticizing the fact that PFA Pension's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with the rules of Article 32 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. The circumstances of the case
Following a review of the data received by the Data Inspectorate for breaches of the personal data security, the Authority has been able to establish that PFA Pension per February 8, 2019 has reported 66 breaches of personal data security to the Authority.
On the basis of a closer examination of the received reports, the Data Inspectorate was able to find that 62 out of 66 reports relate to accidental disclosure of personal data in connection with the transmission of documents via the communication solution "My PFA", e-Box, by letter or the like.
In response to the Danish Data Protection Agency's request of 18 February 2019, PFA Pension on 4 March 2019 issued an opinion regarding the reported breaches of the personal data security.
PFA Pension has generally stated that the 66 breaches of personal data security regarding accidental disclosure of customer personal data - in PFA Pension's own opinion - constitute a relatively small proportion of the total communication with the company's customers, but that the number is nevertheless too high.
To this end, PFA Pension has stated that approximately 270,000 customers receive electronic or physical responses from PFA Pension annually as a result of their inquiry, and that the reported breaches of personal data security concern only 0.3 per cent of the total communication with the company's customers.
PFA Pension has further stated that the number of breaches of personal data security as a result of accidental disclosure is distributed with 36 unintended disclosures via the communication solution My PFA, 17 unintended disclosures via postal mail and 13 unintended disclosures using other communication solutions (e-signature, e -mail, e-Box, upload to Appeal Board portal and information sent via bank). Four of the unintentional disclosures were sent by letter mail in connection with PFA Pension's response to objection requests.
In addition, PFA Pension has stated that on February 7, 2019 - as a result of breaches of personal data security - decided to introduce additional control measures when communicating with customers via My PFA, after which employees must actively "check" that the attached document has been checked. for proper recipient before shipment. In addition, PFA Pension's used module letters via Word will be integrated with customer communication via My PFA in order to ensure that the message and document are addressed to the same customer. PFA Pension expects that these measures, which are expected to be implemented by the end of April 2019, will significantly reduce the number of breaches of personal data security.
When responding to objection requests by letter mail, PFA Pension has tightened the existing requirement for "peer control" towards the employees; so that a colleague must check the shipment before sending the documents. Following the tightening, the company has not identified any further breaches of the personal data security in this process.
PFA Pension has, by extension, stated that the company handles physical shipments by automatic envelope, which helps to minimize the risk that customer letters contain personal information about other than the person to whom the letter is intended. Despite automatic enveloping, a significant number of physical shipments are also packaged manually by employees (approximately 82,500 annually). PFA Pension has emphasized that employees must be careful when packing letters.
In addition, PFA Pension stated that, in connection with the implementation of the Data Protection Regulation, the company has prepared policies, procedures and workflows and conducted training in the business areas with a view to the employees becoming aware of the data protection rules, including how personal data should be handled and how to communicate safe with customers. All PFA Pension employees must complete an e-learning course every year, and it will be emphasized in the next course that employees must be careful to ensure that material is sent to the right recipient, as well as supplemented with examples of breaches of personal data security. that employees should pay special attention to.
Finally, PFA Pension has stated that all employees have access to the company's current policies, business procedures and data protection procedures.
3. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
The Data Inspectorate finds that PFA Pension's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with the rules of Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
The Data Inspectorate has in particular emphasized that PFA Pension has reported 66 breaches of the personal data security to the Supervisory Authority from 25 May 2018 to 8 February 2019, where PFA Pension has inadvertently disclosed personal information about customers to incorrect recipients, of which the accidental disclosure in 62 of the cases occurred by attaching the wrong document (s) or sending documents to the wrong recipient in connection with transmission via the communication solution "My PFA", e-Box, by letter or the like.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized PFA Pension's own assessment that the number of breaches of personal data security is too high and that the company has been able to introduce further relatively less technical and organizational measures to ensure a more appropriate level of security.
The Data Inspectorate has emphasized that PFA Pension has taken these new measures, including among other things. in relation to the communication solution My PFA, where the employee must confirm that the attached document is checked for the correct recipient before sending, and the company's used module letters via Word will technically be integrated with the customer communication via My PFA in order to ensure that the message and document are styled to the same person.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that PFA Pension intends to take further measures in relation to the teaching of employees, including adapting the company's e-learning material so that it is emphasized that employees must be careful in ensuring that material is sent to the right recipient.
While the Data Inspectorate, in the light of the breaches of personal data security, finds that there is reason to express criticism that PFA Pension's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Regulation. However, in accordance with paragraph 1, the Authority has noted that PFA Pension continuously monitors the established level of security and that the company, on the basis of the breaches passed, already took steps to implement additional security measures to strengthen treatment safety.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
