
Publication of personal data on clerks for domain registrants
Published 28-03-2019
Decision
The Data Inspectorate has issued an injunction to DK Hostmaster A / S to cease publishing personal data on proxies for domain name registrants in the WHOIS database. Journal number: 2018-31-0455
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has dealt with a complaint where a person working in an IT function often handles the office of clerk for one or more domain name registrars. In this connection, his personal information has been published by DK Hostmaster in the WHOIS database.
On 28 March 2019, the Data Inspectorate decided on the case and issued an order to DK Hostmaster to cease publishing personal data on complaints as a clerk for one or more domain name registrars and personal information on clerks for domain registrars in general.
In the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency, the publication of this information was not necessary for the purpose of carrying out a task in the public interest, nor was the processing of the information limited to what was necessary for the purposes for which the information was processed.
Decision
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case, where [the complainant] has on July 10, 2018 complained to the Danish Data Protection Agency that DK Hostmaster A / S publishes personal information about him in the WHOIS database in connection with his being a representative for several domain name registrants.
1. Order
The Data Inspectorate finds that the processing of personal data in question does not comply with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation [1]. 1 (c) and Article 6 (1). 1 (e).
The Data Inspectorate shall then issue an order to DK Hostmaster A / S to discontinue publishing personal data on complainants for one or more domain name registrants as well as personal information on proxies for domain name registrants in general. The order is issued pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2 (d).
The deadline for compliance with the injunction is April 25, 2019. The Danish Data Protection Agency must request confirmation by the same date that the injunction has been complied with.
According to section 41 (1) of the Data Protection Act [2]. Paragraph 2 (5) shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months to a person who fails to comply with an order issued by the Data Inspectorate pursuant to Article 58 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 2nd
2. Case making
It appears from the case that, on November 18, 2016, complaints complained to the Data Inspectorate that DK Hostmaster published personal information about him in the WHOIS database in connection with his being an agent for several domain name registrars.
By letter of 26 April 2017, the Data Inspectorate forwarded the complaint to the Danish Business Authority, as questions regarding the WHOIS database are, as a starting point, the responsibility of the Danish Business Authority.
On June 12, 2017, the Danish Business Authority made a decision in the case against the Danish Internet Forum (which owns DK Hostmaster) and in this connection found that the Danish Internet Forum does not refer to section 18 of Act No. 164 of 26 February 2014 on Internet domains. entitled to publish a clerk's name and address through the WHOIS database.
On July 10, 2018, the complainant has complained to the Danish Data Protection Agency, as DK Hostmaster continues to publish personal data on proxies for domain name registrants, including complaints.
2.1. DK Hostmaster's remarks
In response to the Danish Data Protection Agency's request of 13 September 2018, DK Hostmaster has on October 4, 2018 issued an opinion in the case:
”DK Hostmaster processes information about complaints by virtue of its role as a clerk for a number of .dk domain names. Some of this information is covered by the Data Protection Regulation's definition of personal data. This is the following information:

user ID (unique identification number that identifies the person in DK-Hostmaster's IT systems),
name,
address,
phone number.

DK Hostmaster has published the above-mentioned personal data on the Internet in the WHOIS database. It is noted that the complainant's telephone number was only published until November 18, 2016, after which this was not disclosed for technical reasons. The other information will continue to be published in connection with the active .dk domain names for which the complainant is a representative.
There are several purposes for publishing information in WHOIS, in particular:

creating openness for a primary technical contact with the person (s) behind a domain name, for example if the content of the domain name is not available, or if a third party is committing cybercrime from the domain name,
to create transparency about who is responsible for the content of a domain name, so that the person (s) can be contacted in order to make any liability for content on a website applicable. This consideration forms the basis of section 18 of the Domain Act, according to which DK Hostmaster is obliged to publish the name, address and telephone number of all persons who have the right to use a .dk domain name (called "registrants"). Section 18 is a continuation of section 8 of the former domain law, which states in the processors:

“The committee's starting point for introducing the provision has been to create a high quality domain with as much transparency in the area as possible. Anyone should be able to know the identity of a registrant and thus who was behind a specific Internet domain name. The provision should, among other things, help to limit rough websites as well as harassment of websites etc., since registrants were not, as a rule, anonymous. "
The purpose of DIFO remains to remain a high-quality domain, and the need for transparency, including for crime prevention purposes, is diminished. The threat of cybercrime is a growing global problem, and DIFO sees it as one of its main objectives to help mitigate this threat within its business area. Therefore, it is DIFO's opinion that the transparency created by publishing registrant contact information should also include proxies, as this role is intended for individuals who undertake - or contribute significantly to - the activity on a domain name.
Therefore, DIFO / DK Hostmaster considers that the personal data of proxies mentioned above can be published on the basis of Article 6 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. According to the Domain Act, DIFO / DK Hostmaster has a duty to ensure a high-quality .dk domain with as much transparency as possible, especially to help reduce crime on the Internet. It is the opinion of DIFO / DK Hostmaster that this is a task that is performed in the interest of the community and not least a task of such importance that the interest of individuals in not showing their contact information in public should deviate from this.
In this connection, it should be noted that registrants and attorneys have the opportunity to hide their contact information from WHOIS by choosing name and address protection in CPR. Thus, the concrete essential reasons that a person may have for not wanting to disclose his contact information are taken into account under this possibility.
In this connection, it should be noted that DK Hostmaster decided on 21 June 2018 to no longer publish user IDs in WHOIS and that this change is expected to be implemented shortly.
It should also be noted that, with effect from 19 December 2017, DK Hostmaster has changed its terms of use for a .dk domain name, and in this connection the wording of the provision regarding the publication of proxy contact information has been tightened.
It now follows even more clearly from DK Hostmaster's new terms that it is a prerequisite for the assignment of the clerk that a clerk accepts the role, including that DK Hostmaster publishes the clerk's name, address and telephone number in WHOIS.
When a person receives a request to accept the role of clerk, it is also very clear from this request that the clerk's contact information is published in WHOIS. This change has been made to create increased information to the clerk about the processing of his personal data. It should be noted that DK Hostmaster has not made this change in order to base the publication of personal data on the consent of the proxy. ”
2.2. Complainant's comments
Complainant has initially stated that as part of his work, he is a clerk for several domain name registrars.
Furthermore, complainants have stated that DK Hostmaster publishes his private contact information rather than his professional contact information, which according to complaints is otherwise the standard for other domain names.
In addition, the complainant has stated that the office of clerk for a domain name is typically a technical function performed by employees of an IT function and that clerks thus do not directly influence how the domain is used, since they are not owners of the domain. .
The complainant has stated below that the job is part of his job function and that he can therefore not opt ​​out of being a clerk for a domain name.
Similarly, complainants have stated that it is not reasonable for him to have name and address protection to avoid having his personal information published in connection with a regular IT job.
Complaints have finally pointed out that the administrator of domain names in i.a. Germany only discloses personal data according to individual documentation and that the administrator in Sweden does not disclose information at all.
3. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision on injunctions
The Data Inspectorate finds that the publication of personal data on complaints in connection with his being an attorney for one or more domain name registrar (s) is not necessary for the purpose of performing a task in the public interest and thus cannot be done under Article 6 of the Data Protection Regulation. , PCS. 1 (e).
Furthermore, the Data Inspectorate finds that DK Hostmaster's processing of personal data on complaints is not limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which the information is processed, in accordance with Article 5 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (c).
The Data Inspectorate finds below that DK Hostmaster has not sufficiently explained the need to publish personal data on complaints in connection with the fact that complaints are proxy for one or more domain name registrar (s).
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that any civil or criminal liability for content on a domain name should, as a starting point, be claimed against the registrant of the website and not his representative. In the opinion of the Authority, this consideration is satisfied by, inter alia, Section 18 (2) of the Domain Act. 2, according to which the administrator is required to publish personal information about the registrant of a domain name.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that the Danish Business Authority has decided that section 18 (1) of the Domain Act. 2 also does not imply an obligation to disclose personal data of a clerk to the registrant.
It is also stated in cl. 8.2. in DK Hostmaster's Terms of Use for a .dk domain name that a clerk can dispose of on behalf of the registrant, including switching name servers and switching payers, and that messages from DK Hostmaster regarding the actions that the clerk has access to take on behalf of the registrant will only be sent to the clerk.
Against this background, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that a clerk in relation to a domain name has access to act on behalf of the registrant in relation to DK Hostmaster, including setting settings regarding the domain name and making payment for it. However, it is not in the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency that a clerk for a registrant is the person who handles - or contributes significantly to - the activity on a domain name.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that the pursued objectives can be achieved with less intrusive means, including by disclosing personal data on proxies on request rather than publishing the information on the Internet.
The Data Inspectorate notes, below, that by point. 7.2. DK Hostmaster's Terms of Use for a .dk domain name indicate that DK Hostmaster may, upon request, disclose information about a registrant or a registered domain name to natural and legal persons who have documented their eligibility pursuant to Danish law.
Finally, the Danish Data Protection Agency notes that, by letter of 5 July 2018, the European Data Protection Council, in relation to the global WHOIS database managed by ICANN, has stated, among other things: following:
“The EPDB considers that registrants should in principle not be required to provide personal data directly identifying individual employees (or third parties) fulfilling the administrative or technical functions on behalf of the registrant. […] It should therefore be made clear, as part of the registration process, that the registrant is free to (1) designate the same person as the registrant (or its representative) as the administrative or technical contact; or (2) provide contact information that does not directly identify the administrative or technical contact person concerned (e.g., admin@company.com). "
After an overall assessment of the above circumstances, the Data Inspectorate finds that DK Hostmaster's publication of personal data on complaints in connection with his / her duties as a clerk for one or more domain name registrants does not comply with Article 5 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (c) and Article 6 (1). 1 (e).
 [1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general Data Protection Regulation). [2] Law No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
