Press Release
Berlin, September 9, 2019

Data protection officers strengthen companies
BvD autumn conference discusses the effects of the changed designation rules
Appeal after relaxation of the naming obligation for data protection officers (DSB)
Supervisory authorities and the Professional Association of the Data Protection Officer of Germany (BvD)
e.V. to the companies concerned, not to the data protection know-how of the DSBs
without. Applications in the areas of Artificial Intelligence (AI), data tracking and
Scoring not only turned the digital world into a highly complex data protection law
Working field, said BvD CEO Thomas Spaeing. "Who eased through the
Designation waived on the expertise of the data protection officer, is at risk
To make mistakes."
The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information BadenWürttemberg, Dr. med. Stefan Brink, emphasized after the first year of the General Data Protection Regulation that the supervisory authorities intensified their control activities. "Data protection officers are important contact persons for us and the companies. They help companies establish themselves in compliance with the law and thereby save time and money
to save - not to mention any fines for infringements. "
The President of the Bavarian State Office for Data Protection Supervision, Thomas Kranig, criticized, "with the numerical loosening becomes the federal legislator of the economy one
To do a disservice. It would have been better to clarify what happens in a world where everyone is involved
Tablet and smartphone acts with constant employment really meant. "
And the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection, Professor Thomas Petri, emphasized, "Reliable data protection has become a trademark. Businesses who now do without a DSB reveal an important part of their customer trust. "
Before the summer break, the Federal Government had initiated the amendment to the BDSG, which was intended to "loosen up" the naming obligation for companies: thereafter
then private companies have to name a DSB if there are more than 20 people all the time
dealing with the processing of personal data. So far, the border was included
10 employees.
According to a survey by the magazine "Data Protection Practice", want from the affected
19 percent in the future no DSB name more. 20 percent of companies that
do not need to name a DSB after the new rule, but do not want to change their privacy organization.
"Every second company affected by the new regulation has realized how important
the technical advice from a DSB is, "said Spaeing. Especially young companies
and start-ups that develop new technologies or offer Internet services
he to call a DSB. "Young companies develop their ideas and products in
puncto Privacy often in a supposedly lawless space. But who the requirements
1

Press Release
international partners or customers can quickly turn into a competitive disadvantage. "
The core competences of the data protection officer will also be around 200 participants
which will be held on October 23 and 24 under the motto "Economy Meets Supervision" for the third BvD Autumn Conference, which this year will be held in Nuremberg
takes place. The BvD invites to the conference together with the data protection supervisory authorities of Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria. Other topics include: Connected Car, Pre-Employment Screening, Binding Corporate Rules, cross-border traffic to non-EU countries, tracking, big data, fines, scoring, data breaches, and more
lots of tips and tricks from the everyday handling of the General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO).
The speakers include the journalist and columnist Heribert Prantl of the Süddeutsche Zeitung, Deutsche Bahn's Group Data Protection Officer, Chris Newiger,
as well as the author Stephan Orth. In a separate slot, the country representatives answer daily questions from the participants.
The Bavarian State Minister Joachim Herrmann (CSU) opens the Government Day on October 25.
In addition to many topics from the everyday life of the authorities, it is also about the possibilities of the
technical data protection, the tasks of DSBs, and data breaches in the public domain. The Government Day will be the youtuber and journalist Rayk Anders, with a keynote address
of the other kind.

Note for journalists:
You will receive a separate invitation to the BvD Autumn Conference and the Government Day in Nuremberg.
The current program overview can be found under:
https://www.bvdnet.de/termin/bvd-herbstkonferenz-datenschutz-2019/
https://www.bvdnet.de/termin/behoerdentag-2019/
Your contact person:
BvD Press Office, Tel: 030 26 36 77 60, Budapester Straße 31, 10787 Berlin
E-Mail: pressestelle@bvdnet.de, Internet: https://www.bvdnet.de
Press Office Bavarian State Office for Data Protection Supervision, Tel.: 0981 / 180093-0, promenade
18, 91522 Ansbach, E-Mail: presse@lda.bayern.de, Internet: https://www.lda.bayern.de
Press Office LfDI Baden-Württemberg, Tel: 0711 / 615541-716, Königstraße 10 a, 70173 Stuttgart
E-Mail: pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de, Internet: https://www.lfdi.bwl.de
Press Office BayLfD, Tel .: 089/2126720, Wagmüllerstraße 18, 80538 Munich, E-Mail: poststelle@datenschutz-bayern.de, Internet: https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de

The BvD: The representation of interests of the data protection officer
The Professional Association of Data Protection Officers of Germany (BvD) e.V. promotes the professional interests of data protection officers in public authorities and companies and is actively involved in the further development and acceptance of the profession
"Data Protection Officer" - as the only professional association for data protection officers in Germany.

2
