PRESS RELEASE
PRIVACY INJURIES PREPARE INCREASE CAREFUL!
Since the effective date of the European General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO) on
May 25, 2018 become the country commissioner for data protection and freedom of information
(LfDI) reported significantly more errors when dealing with data. That's one thing
pleasing, because this reporting obligation is one of the central requirements of the DS-GVO.
On the other hand, behind such a message is usually a negligence or a
Organizational fault. The number of reports of such violations of protection
personal data according to Art. 33 DS-GVO, colloquially called "Datenpanne",
have increased tenfold since May 2018!
Hardly a day goes by without the state commissioner reporting data breaches
receives. Since the beginning of the year, just under 1,000 such notifications have been received.
The topics range from incidents with encryption ransomware (ransomware) to
Missing medical reports. In May 2019, 177 more than ever before
on.
The most frequently reported privacy breaches:
place

Type of message

1

Post false shipping

2

Hacking attacks / malware / trojan

3

E-mail incorrect shipping

4

Theft of a data carrier

5

Sending an e-mail with an open address distributor

6

Loss of a disk

7

Fax incorrect shipping

With increasing concern, the LfDI observes the high number of data breaches in
Surgeries. Especially encryption Trojans make the responsible here to create.
It is also a common mistake to submit patient reports, prescriptions or x-rays to the
to transmit wrong recipient.

King Street 10 a

+49 711 7 61 55 41 - 716

70173 Stuttgart

pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de

https://www.badenwuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/

The State Representative, Dr. med. Stefan Brink: "Especially in the medical field
extremely sensitive and sensitive personal data is processed. Therefore, it is
especially important here is that these data are handled carefully and correctly.
Technical and organizational measures such as data backup, encryption, training
and sensitization of employees are - as in all areas in which
personal data is handled - an absolute must! "In case of a data breach
with health data are regularly in addition to the message to the LfDI also affected
to notify yourself.
When do you have to report data breaches?
Not every violation of the protection of personal data leads to a reporting obligation
Art. 33 DS-GMO. What matters is whether the breach of privacy is at risk for the company
Rights and freedoms of natural persons. Explanations on this and in general for
Obligatory reporting with clear practical examples can be found in the European guidelines
Data Protection Committee.
fines
Due to erroneous handling of data so far by the penalty office of the LfDI
Fines of 207,140 euros imposed. The highest fines were two
Fines in the amount of € 80,000.00 - in both cases, it was
Data breaches: In one case were in a digital publication due to insufficient
internal controls accidentally released health data. In another
Case, a financial information company had improperly handled personal information
disposed of.
Further links to the topic
 Frequently asked questions about privacy in medical practices
 Hacker attacks - Recommended actions after successful attacks
 Notes on handling passwords
 Central point of contact Cybercrime for companies and authorities
 Contribution "discretion in the doctor's office" in the 34th TB under 7.1, p. 107
 Contribution "Physicians and DS-GVO (privacy policy)" in the 34th TB under 1.8,
Pp. 48-53
 Online form for reporting a personal data protection breach
according to Art. 33 DS-GVO
If you have any questions, please contact us at the number 0711 / 615541-716.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
