THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

September 10, 2018

Europe is bigger than the EU
Twinning project of the EU in Albania
Albania is on its way to the European Union. End of June 2014 was
officially granted the status of an EU candidate country, the opening
The accession negotiations were decided in June this year.
The Albanians are now expected to undergo extensive reforms - among others
in the fight against organized crime and widespread corruption. Here, the State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI), Dr. med. Stefan Brink, the EU's anti-corruption project as twinning expert, accompanies the country on its way to European standards.
On 4 September 2018, the LfDI and its counterpart, the Albanian Data Protection and Information Commissioner Besnik Dervishi, signed a cooperation agreement. "I am very much looking forward to this collaboration, learning from each other, sharing insights and experiences, developing a mutual understanding of the legal background and also the culture of the other," Brink said at the signing ceremony. "I think we have
both our own traditions and values ​​that we bring to this cooperation
can: In Germany and Europe we have high data protection standards. They are also based on the terrible experiences we have had with a state,
who collects the personal data of his citizens, evaluates and targets against his
Citizens. ", Brink continues. "In the field of freedom of information emerges
In contrast, a very different picture, here we can of the undisputed high
Learn legal standards of the Albanian law on the right to information from official documents of 1999. "
At the federal level, the Freedom of Information Act came into force only in 2006 and in Baden-Württemberg a law was passed in 2015.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

Albanian law is exemplary for clear and open access to state information - but here too the question of a successful implementation of this law is translated into practical administrative action.
Brink: "Transparency and openness of the administration are important foundations for
democratic decisions and the formation of a free public will. The
The right of access to state information offers citizens the opportunity to
to control their administration and government and to prevent undesirable developments
- Combating corruption is just one - but a particularly important - aspect.
Accompanying Albania on this path to the EU represents an opportunity for both partners
represents. "

If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0. Further
Information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
The press release is available on the Internet at http://www.badenwuerttemberg.datenschutz.de.
