THE COUNCIL APPLICANT FOR DATA PROTECTION AND INFORMATION FREEDOM

PRESS RELEASE

June 13, 2018

Challenges of the Data Protection Regulation mastered with flying colors
Since 2016, the European Data Protection Basic Regulation (DS-GVO) already exists.
Nevertheless, the DS-GVO with the unfolding of its validity on May 25, 2018, many companies faced seemingly insurmountable hurdles. The Rolls-Royce Power Systems business unit has dealt with this topic at an early stage and
in cooperation with the State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI), Dr. med. Stefan Brink, a project task made of it.
Rolls-Royce Power Systems is a specialist for large engines, propulsion systems and
Decentralized energy systems of the MTU and MTU Onsite Energy brands. The company, headquartered in Friedrichshafen, employs over 10,000 people worldwide
and is a division of British technology group Rolls-Royce plc.
"The careful handling of personal data has been with us for a long time
This is why we are already integrated in a management system ", says Marcus A. Wassenberg, Member of the Management Board of Rolls-Royce Power Systems. "The new General Data Protection Regulation has prompted us to refill anyway and align and clearly structure the processes. A revised global policy governs dealings and responsibilities. About 10,000 employees in 24 countries around the world have been specially trained - including top management. "Our privacy management system is designed to do the
DGSVO constantly in view and consider the protection of personal
Data as a permanent task. This is a natural part of our compliance rules, "said Wassenberg.
"The structured approach, both in terms of project implementation and ongoing operation, has made this project an exciting reference project for the LfDI.

Königstraße 10 a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

makes, "said the country representative. The Rolls Royce example is a good example of this
that the increased demands of data protection were convincingly mastered
could become. "A good foundation is now laid, now it depends on the
To anchor data protection in the minds of employees (also and especially abroad) and to carry out appropriate training and sensitization
provide concrete assistance for the daily work routine ", says Brink.
A future collaboration between Rolls-Royce Power Systems and the
LfDI is sought.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
