TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Leave.EU Group Limited

Lysander House, Catbrain Lane, Cribbs Causeway, Bristol BS10 7TQ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Leave.EU Group Limited (“Leave.EU”) with a monetary penalty under
section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in
relation to a serious contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy and

Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Leave.EU, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 09763501), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
transmitted unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to
individual subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to
regulation 22 of PECR.

Regulation 22 of PECR states:
Q

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited

communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
10.

Bo
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Individual” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a living individual

and includes an unincorporated body of such individuals”.

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “any text,
voice, sound or image message sent over a public electronic
communications network which can be stored in the network or in the
recipient’s terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and

includes messages sent using a short message service”.

The term “soft opt-in” is used to describe the rule set out in Regulation
22(3) of PECR. In essence, an organisation may be able to e-mail its
existing customers even if they haven't specifically consented to
electronic mail. The soft opt-in rule can only be relied upon by the

organisation that collected the contact details.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —-
11.

12.

1

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements

of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person,
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see

paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case
14,

LS

16.

17.

18.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Leave.EU came to the attention of the Commissioner during
investigations in relation to the wider use of personal data and
analytics by political campaigns, social media and insurance
companies. In particular Leave.EU has been investigated about its
relationship with Eldon Insurance Services Ltd (“Eldon”) (which trades

using the brand GoSkippy Insurance) and their use of personal data.

The Commissioner is aware from publicly available company records
and her investigation that there is a significant cross-over of employees
and senior figures between the organisations named above. Leave.EU
was incorporated on 4 September 2015 with two named directors who
were also at that time directors of Eldon, and its sole subscriber is also
the owner of the sole subscriber in Eldon (and was also the person with
significant control in respect of both entities, and a director of Eldon).

Leave.EU and Eldon share the same corporate address.

In those circumstances, the Commissioner considers it especially
important that different data controllers within the same corporate
group have clear policies and procedures in place to ensure that
marketing activities are appropriately delineated. That is particularly so

where the different controllers have different businesses.

The Commissioner's investigations led to an Information Notice being
served on Leave.EU on 27 July 2018, requesting information in relation
to a promotional banner advertising the services of GoSkippy Insurance
(“GoSkippy”) which the Commissioner had become aware had been
included within newsletters sent via email by Leave.EU to Leave.EU

subscribers.

Leave.EU responded to the Information Notice on 23 August 2018
providing the following information:

5
17.

20.

21.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Between 25 February 2017 and 31 July 2017, 1,020,661 such emails

were received by Leave.EU subscribers.

The majority of these emails were weekly round-up newsletters and all
of them contained a banner showing the GoSkippy logo and offered
‘10% off’ for Leave.EU supporters. If the banner is clicked the

GoSkippy website is accessed.

In addition, on 23 August 2016, 49,191 emails were sent to Leave.EU
subscribers titled “Skippy Saves the Day”. Again, the content of these

messages offered a 10% discount on all GoSkippy insurance products.

Leave.EU did not receive any complaints about the inclusion of the
GoSkippy marketing. There was suggestion that a small number of

subscribers welcomed the discount.

This response confirmed therefore that, on the dates specified by
Leave.EU in their response to the Commissioner’s Information Notice of
27 July 2018, a total of 1,069,852 messages were sent by Leave.EU
and received by subscribers over two separate periods, each containing

marketing material promoting the services of GoSkippy.

The information provided by Leave.EU indicates that 311,735 of those
email messages were opened by the recipient. In its representations to
the Notice of Intent, Leave.EU stated that on its calculations of the
changes in subscribers over the relevant time period, approximately

54,286 different subscribers would have received relevant emails.

When queried as to the consent held by Leave.EU for the sending of

these messages, Leave.EU responded to say that they believed the
22%

23.

24.

@
1C O o
Information Commissioner's Office
emails were not unsolicited since subscribers, as part of their
registration process, provided consent to receive Leave.EU newsletters,
and the privacy policy that Leave.EU provided made reference to

subscribers receiving “information about other organisations’ products

and services”.

A review of the cited Privacy Policy was conducted by the
Commissioner. The Policy provided with the response to the
Information Notice was expressed only to apply to a different company
and data controller: Better For The Country. For present purposes, the
Commissioner is content to accept that the Policy was also used by
Leave.EU and was understood to be applicable to it by Leave.EU’s
subscribers, but may review that acceptance in the light of any further
information which comes to light. The Policy advises that the
subscribers’ data may be used by the controller or “selected third
parties” to provide information about goods or services which may be
of interest. It does not name GoSkippy, or indeed any third parties at
all. It does not explain that the goods or services which it may deem
the subscriber to be interested in could include very different matters
to those which it itself is concerned in. Furthermore, it does not make
clear the types of marketing which subscribers could expect to receive

or the forms of communication that such marketing might take.

It was confirmed that there is no formal contract in place between
Leave.EU and GoSkippy to provide direct marketing, and that the

inclusion was an informal arrangement.

The Commissioner has considered whether her findings constitute
a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by Leave.EU as the sender of
the messages and, if so, whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are

satisfied.
25.

26.

27.

AS.

29.

30.

31.

Q

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner notes that she has separately considered whether
Eldon also contravened regulation 22 of PECR as having instigated the
messages. Sending and instigating the sending of direct marketing

emails amount to separate and distinct breaches of PECR and have

been addressed as separate cases.
The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Leave.EU has contravened regulation 22
of PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

On 23 August 2016, and between the dates of 25 February 2017 and
31 July 2017, Leave.EU transmitted 1,069,852 direct marketing emails
to subscribers containing a banner advertising the services of

GoSkippy.

The section 11(3) DPA definition of direct marketing covers any
advertising or marketing material, and applies to messages which
contain even some marketing elements, even if that is not their main

purpose.

Contrary to the representations advanced by Leave.EU, the
Commissioner is not satisfied that Leave.EU held the requisite consent
of subscribers to send direct marketing to them in the form of emails

which contained marketing banners relating to GoSkippy.

The Commissioner is of the view that these messages therefore
constitute unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to
individual subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to
regulation 22 of PECR.
32.

ai

34.

che

36.

37.

@
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents
to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.

Indirect, or third party, consent can be valid but only if it is clear and

specific enough.

As the sender of the direct marketing emails, it was the responsibility
of Leave.EU to ensure that it held appropriate consent to send those
messages, and that this consent applied to marketing material

advertising GoSkippy.

Regulation 22(3) provides for a ‘soft opt-in’ exception to enable
organisations to send marketing emails to existing customers however
the Commissioner’s Direct Marketing Guidance at paragraph 131 states
that to rely on this exception the organisation must have obtained the
contact details in the course of a sale of a product or service to that
person; must only be marketing their own similar products and
services; and must have given the person a simple opportunity to

refuse/opt-out of the marketing.

As Leave.EU were advertising the services of GoSkippy, and not their
own similar products or services, they cannot rely on the “soft opt-in”

exception.

The Privacy Policy relied on by Leave.EU does not specifically name

GoSkippy, rather it referred only to ‘third parties’.

Consent will not be “informed” if individuals do not understand what
they are consenting to. Organisations should therefore always ensure
that the language used is clear, easy to understand, and not hidden
away in a privacy policy or small print. Consent will not be valid if

individuals are asked to agree to receive marketing from “similar

9
38.

39;

40.

41.

42.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

organisations”, “partners”, “selected third parties” or other similar

generic description.

The Commissioner’s direct marketing guidance says “organisations
need to be aware that indirect consent will not be enough for texts,
emails or automated calls. This is because the rules on electronic
marketing are stricter, to reflect the more intrusive nature of electronic

messages.”

It goes on to say that indirect consent can be valid but only if it is clear
and specific enough. Moreover, “the customer must have anticipated
that their details would be passed to the organisation in question, and
that they were consenting to messages from that organisation. This will

depend on what exactly they were told when consent was obtained”.

It is apparent to the Commissioner that the wording of the Privacy
Policy relied upon by Leave.EU was not sufficiently clear and precise so
as to give the subscriber a reasonable expectation that they would
receive direct marketing advertising the services of GoSkippy. The
Commissioner does not consider that a subscriber to political emails
from Leave.EU can be taken to have consented to receiving marketing
on behalf of an insurance company. There would need to be clear and
specific evidence of such consent, whether direct or indirect. There is

not.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that Leave.EU did not have the
necessary valid consent for the 1,069,852 direct marketing emails

which were sent to subscribers.

The Commissioner is satisfied that Leave.EU was responsible for this
contravention and has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA were met, that is to say that the contravention

10
43.

44,

45.

46.

Information Commissioner's Office

is of a sufficiently serious nature, and was carried out either

deliberately or, in the alternative, negligently.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because on 23 August 2016 and between
the dates of 25 February 2017 and 31 July 2017, a total of 1,069,852
direct marketing emails were sent by Leave.EU, and received by over
54,000 subscribers, advertising marketing material for which they had

not provided consent.

The Commissioner does not consider that a contravention is rendered
not serious simply because some of the emails were not opened by the
recipient: that is a matter of pure chance, over which Leave.EU has no
control. Nor does the Commissioner accept, contrary to Leave.EU’s
representations, that the contravention is not serious because it was
not accompanied by unlawful data sharing between Eldon and

Leave.EU.

Therefore, given the number of affected subscribers and the 21
repeated occasions on which the contravention occurred, the
Commissioner is satisfied that condition (a) from section 55A(1) DPA is

met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate.
47.

48.

49.

oa)
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner considers that in this case Leave.EU did not
deliberately contravene regulation 22 of PECR, but rather was
negligent. Whilst Leave.EU did seek to send direct marketing to
subscribers, and that marketing contained elements relating to the

products of GoSkippy, there is no evidence of a deliberate intention on
the part of Leave.EU to breach PECR.

The Commissioner has therefore gone on to consider whether the
contraventions identified above were negligent. First, she has
considered whether Leave.EU knew or ought reasonably to have known
that there was a risk that these contraventions would occur. She is
satisfied that this condition is met. PECR has been in place for the
entirety of the existence of Leave.EU (and well before its
incorporation), and its terms and enforcement have been the subject of
regular media coverage. There is no suggestion from Leave.EU that it
was unaware of its obligations under PECR. Leave.EU having taken an
incorrect view of the law does not provide it with an answer to whether
it ought reasonably to have known even of a risk of a contravention: it
has, for example, provided no evidence of any positive consideration

having been given to compliance at the relevant time.

Second, the Commissioner considered whether Leave.EU failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions. The Commissioner has
published detailed guidance for those carrying out direct marketing
explaining their legal obligations under PECR. This guidance gives clear
advice regarding the requirements of consent for direct marketing and
explains the circumstances under which organisations are able to carry
out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by post, or by fax. In
particular it states that organisations can generally only send

marketing emails to individuals if that person has specifically consented

to receiving them from the sender. It also makes it clear that particular

12
50.

DL.

52.

53.

54.

2

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
care must be taken when promoting the aims, ideals, or services of

third party organisations to ensure that the consent being relied upon

is appropriate.

Reasonable steps that might be expected of Leave.EU in the context of
this case would have included listing third parties by name within the
Privacy Policy (which would have been particularly easy to do in
respect of third parties who were within the same corporate group),
and making clear in the Policy that marketing communications on
behalf of third parties might encompass entirely different sectors with
no connection to the purpose for which the subscriber had consented to
receiving Leave.EU emails. It would also be expected that Leave.EU
would have a formal contractual arrangement with any party whose

advertising was to be included in its marketing emails.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that Leave. EU

failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetary penalty

The Commissioner has taken the following mitigating factor into

account:

e The Commissioner and Leave.EU have received no complaints

about the contravention.

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the

conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is

13
55.

56.

o7.

58.

99.

Information Commissioner's Office

also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by Leave.EU on this matter dated 4 December 2018.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case to reflect the specific contravention of Leave.EU.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty.

She does not consider that there is any basis to conclude that issuing a
monetary penalty in the terms proposed in this Notice would affect
economic growth, and in any event, such a penalty would be

appropriate in all the circumstances.

The Commissioner has considered the likely impact of a monetary
penalty on Leave.EU, including by reference to the company accounts
provided to her by Leave.EU and its financial status as set out in those
accounts. She has decided on the information that is available to her
that Leave.EU has access to sufficient financial resources to pay the
proposed monetary penalty without causing undue financial hardship,
given the relatively modest amount of the penalty set on the facts of
this case and the level of its cash assets recorded in its accounts. The
Commissioner also notes that the company has received considerable
loans from one of the directors of the company and no evidence has
been provided to suggest that the funding relationship will be

withdrawn.
60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of
unsolicited marketing emails is a matter of significant public concern. A
monetary penalty in this case should act as a general encouragement
towards compliance with the law, or at least as a deterrent against
non-compliance, on the part of all persons running businesses currently
engaging in these practices. The issuing of a monetary penalty will
reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

messaging those who specifically consent to receive marketing.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £45,000 (forty five thousand pounds)
is reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case

and the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 6 March 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
5 March 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £36,000 (thirty six thousand pounds). However, you

15
Information Commissioner's Office

should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

65. There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

66. Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
67. Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

68. The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

69. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In

Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as

16
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 1*t day of February 2019

Signed .

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

i Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3y You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ
a)

b)

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule,

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

Cc)

d)

e)

f)

g)

n)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

19
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

20