
New opinion on publicly available personal data on Lectio.dk
Published 16-07-2019
Decision
Private companies
The publication of personal data on past and present teachers and pupils' forms in Lectio has not been in accordance with the data protection rules. Journal number: 2018-432-0017
Summary
In the fall of 2018, the Data Inspectorate decided to initiate an investigation into the publication of personal data in the study administrative system Lectio, which is used by most of the upper secondary schools. For the purpose of conducting the study, the Authority selected a random high school to answer a number of questions. During the Danish Data Protection Agency's handling of the case, MaCom A / S, which provides Lectio, decided to put all information in Lectio behind a login.
On July 4, 2019, the Authority ruled on the matter. In the Authority's view, the disclosure of personal data on past and current teacher and student schedules in the student administration system of Lectio - despite the Authority's prior practice - did not comply with the data protection rules.
Overall, the Data Inspectorate found that the publication of personal data went beyond what was necessary in relation to the purpose of the processing, and therefore the publication could not be included within the data protection rules. This applied both to the publication as such and to the temporal extent of the publication.
In the assessment, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that the previous openness on Lectio did not immediately pursue objectives that sufficiently justified its publication. That the information at disclosure was readily available to students and teachers did not change this. In continuation of this, the Authority emphasized that, to a certain extent, the disclosure offered the possibility of abuse, which could therefore entail certain risks for the data subjects.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate stated that the basic principles for processing personal data must continue to be adhered to when processing information behind login. This means, among other things, that the information behind the login must be sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purpose for which they are processed. The high school will thus have to limit access to the information to the greatest extent possible both in terms of the content and the temporal extent, and in this connection it must be considered what information the individual groups of persons should have access to.
The opinion
The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case initiated by the Authority itself, in which the Authority, by letter of 9 October 2018, requested Rungsted Gymnasium for an opinion on the publication of personal data via the Internet on the website www.Lectio.dk (hereafter Lectio) offered by MaCom A / S.
By letter of 6 November 2018, Rungsted Gymnasium has issued an opinion on the matter.
1. Opinion of the Data Inspectorate
Following a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that the publication of personal data on past and present teachers and pupils' forms in the study administrative system Lectio has not been done in accordance with the data protection rules.
However, the Data Inspectorate has noted that MaCom A / S - in the course of the case - has decided to put all information in Lectio behind a login. Against this background, the audit does not take any further action in the case.
Below is a review of the case and a detailed account of the Danish Data Protection Agency's conclusion.
2. Case making
It appears from the case that on Rungsted Gymnasium's open page at Lectio [1], personal information on past and present teachers and pupils' schedules, including information on teachers' leave and pupils' probation periods, was published - without any login requirements. At the time of initiation of this case, it was possible to access information back from the 2005/06 school year to the 2018/19 school year.
Rungsted Gymnasium has stated in the case that the upper secondary school is responsible for the data processing described above.
Rungsted Gymnasium has further stated that via Lectio, personal data only covered by Article 6 of the Data Protection Regulation are published. The secondary school has, by extension, stated that the publication of personal data on high school employees is done in accordance with Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (b), while information on students is provided for in Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (e).
Rungsted Gymnasium has stated that MaCom A / S believes that the upper secondary school is also responsible for the publication of personal data, as MaCom A / S has not previously met the high school's needs and requirements for closing access to personal data on Lectio's front page without a login, just like MaCom A / S previously denied the high school's request to remove the high school from the front page of Lectio's website.
By extension, Rungsted Gymnasium has stated that upon receipt of the Data Protection Authority's letter of 9 October 2018, Rungsted Gymnasium succeeded in getting MaCom A / S to remove forms from previous school years from the open part of the website. The high school also removed the link to Lectio on the high school's own website to restrict access to publicly available information and has endeavored to manually minimize the amount of information in the schedules for the current school year.
In addition, Rungsted Gymnasium has generally provided information on the initiatives that the upper secondary school has taken to improve data protection for both pupils and teachers.
During the Danish Data Protection Agency's handling of this case, MaCom A / S has decided to put all information in Lectio behind a login. Rungsted Gymnasium has stated that MaCom will in future create "partitions" behind the login function and that Rungsted Gymnasium - until MaCom A / S has made all necessary changes - has established its own procedures for processing information in Lectio.
3. Relevant legal rules
The Data Protection Regulation applies to the processing of personal data which is wholly or partially processed by means of automatic data processing and to other non-automatic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register, in accordance with Article 2 (2) of the Regulation. First
The processing of ordinary, non-sensitive information must take place if one of the following conditions in Article 6 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (a) to (f) is met:

The data subject has consented to the processing of his personal data for one or more specific purposes.
Processing is necessary for the fulfillment of a contract to which the data subject is a party or for the implementation of measures taken at the request of the data subject prior to the conclusion of a contract.
Processing is necessary to comply with a legal obligation incumbent on the data controller.
Treatment is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or another natural person.
Processing is necessary for the sake of performing a task in the interest of the community or falling under public authority imposed by the data controller.
Processing is necessary for the data controller or a third party to pursue a legitimate interest, unless the data subject's interests or fundamental rights and freedoms requiring personal data protection precede this, especially if the data subject is a child.

Article 6 (2) The provisions of paragraph 1 (f) shall not apply to processing carried out by public authorities in the performance of their duties.
Moreover, the processing of personal data must always be in accordance with the basic principles of Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation.
This means, among other things, that information must:

be legally, reasonably and transparently treated in relation to the data subject ('legality, reasonableness and transparency')
is collected for explicitly stated and legitimate purposes and may not be processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes ('purpose limitation')
be sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed ('data minimization')
is stored in such a way that it is not possible to identify the data subjects for a longer period than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data in question is processed ('storage restriction').

4. Background to the Danish Data Protection Agency's conclusion
In the following, the Data Inspectorate will only consider the publication of personal data which was in effect at the time of the initiation of this case by the Authority.
The Data Inspectorate finds - in accordance with Rungsted Gymnasium's announcement in this regard - that the high school was responsible for the data disclosure in question at Lectio, as defined in Article 4 (7) of the Regulation, while MaCom A / S acts as data processor for the high school, cf. Article 4 (8).
The Data Inspectorate notes that Rungsted Gymnasium's comments on MaCom A / S's unwillingness to change the system in accordance with the high school's wishes do not in the opinion of the Data Inspectorate affect the present case, which concerns the high school's obligations as data controller for the data processing in question.
On the basis of the facts of the case, the Data Inspectorate assumes that no personal data were disclosed within the scope of Article 9 of the Data Protection Regulation, which deals with the processing of specific categories of personal data (sensitive information). This means that only a basis of treatment must be found in Article 6 of the Regulation.
As described above, Rungsted Gymnasium states that the processing basis for the high school's publication of personal data on the high school's employees is done in accordance with Article 6 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1 (b), while information on students is provided for in Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. 1 (e).
In accordance with Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. In accordance with paragraph 1 (b), processing of personal data is lawful if the processing is necessary for the purposes of fulfilling a contract to which the data subject is a party or for the implementation of measures taken at the request of the data subject prior to the conclusion of a contract. contract. It is the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency that this provision cannot form the basis for the publication of personal data concerning the teachers of the high school. This is because, in the opinion of the Authority, it cannot be considered necessary in the specific case to publish personal data for the purpose of fulfilling an employment contract.
The Data Inspectorate considers that processing should be assessed in accordance with Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. (B) the processing of personal data is lawful if the processing is necessary for the purpose of carrying out a task in the public interest or which falls under the public authority exercised by the data controller.
The provision of Article 6 (2) of the Regulation. Article 5 (1) (e) must be viewed in the context of the basic principles for the processing of personal data contained in Article 5 of the Regulation. Thus, in accordance with paragraph 1 (c), the processing of personal data is subject to a principle of proportionality, while processing under point (e) of the provision is subject to a general storage restriction.
Overall, the Danish Data Protection Agency finds that the publication of the personal data in question went beyond what was necessary in relation to the purpose of the processing, which is why the publication is not considered to be possible within the data protection rules. This applies both to the publication as such and to the temporal extent of the publication.
In this connection, the Danish Data Protection Agency emphasized that the previous openness on Lectio did not immediately pursue such purposes as were sufficiently justified for publication. The fact that the information at disclosure was easily accessible to students and teachers does not change this. In continuation of this, the Authority has emphasized that the publication to some extent offered the possibility of abuse, which could therefore entail certain risks for the data subjects.
The Data Inspectorate notes that the Authority has previously commented on the processing of personal data in Lectio. [2] In the most recent opinion (January 2009-24-0028), the Authority found that the high school in question had a legitimate interest in publishing teacher forms at Lectio and that the interest of the data subject did not exceed this interest, which is why the treatment could be held before section 6 (2) of the Personal Data Act [3]. 1 (7) (the balancing rule).
Nevertheless, the Data Inspectorate finds - for the reasons stated above - that the publication could not be included within the scope of the Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act. This opinion thus reflects a new assessment of the publication of personal data on Lectio.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate draws attention to the fact that the basic principles for the processing of personal data contained in Article 5 of the Data Protection Regulation must continue to be observed in the processing of information behind the login.
This means, among other things, that the information behind the login must be sufficient, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purpose for which they are processed. Rungsted Gymnasium will thus have to limit access to the information to the greatest possible extent both in terms of content and temporal extent, and in this connection it must be considered what information the individual groups of persons should have access to.
5. Concluding remarks
The Data Inspectorate hereby considers the case to be closed and thereafter does not proceed further in the case.
[1] https://www.lectio.dk/lectio/59/default.aspx.
[2] Resp. 2004-312-0045 and 2009-24-0028.
[3] Act No. 429 of 31 May 2000 on the processing of personal data with subsequent amendments (repealed).
