
Complaint about Wash World ApS 'handling of the data subject's request for access to television surveillance footage
Published 05-03-2019
Decision
Private companies
The Danish Data Protection Agency expresses serious criticism that the data subject's request for access to television surveillance footage has not been processed in accordance with the rules of the Data Protection Regulation. Journal number 2018-832-0004
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has dealt with a complaint that Wash World ApS initially rejected a registrar's request for access on the grounds that other persons were included in the television surveillance footage. Wash World ApS subsequently accepted the request, but only more than three months after the registrant's request.
In the decision, the Data Protection Authority noted that if the data subject requests access to television surveillance footage, which includes information about other persons, the data controller must blur or otherwise remove them by, for example, using image cropping.
Decision
1. The Data Inspectorate hereby returns to the case, where (…) (hereafter complaints) on 3 July 2018 has complained to the Danish Data Inspectorate on Wash World ApS '(hereafter Wash World) handling of the complainant's request for insight.
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is a basis for making serious criticism of Wash World.
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
It appears from the case that complaints in connection with a property damage case had requested Wash World to be provided a copy of the television surveillance footage of himself, his son and car in Wash World, and that after his repeated inquiries, Wash World refused to provide a copy. of the video footage of him.
By letter dated August 27, 2018, the Data Inspectorate requested Wash World for an opinion on the complaint, which Wash World responded to by letters of September 21 and November 12, 2018.
2.1. Complainant's comments
The complainant has stated that he has repeatedly requested Wash World to hand over a copy of television surveillance footage of himself, and that Wash World has denied him the disclosure on the grounds that the disclosure would run counter to the company's private disclosure policy.
Complainant has stated that he subsequently received the footage from the television surveillance.
2.1. Wash World's remarks
By letter of September 21, 2018, Wash World stated that Wash World has received the plaintiff's objection request, which the company has also responded to.
Also, by letter of November 23, 2018, Wash World stated that complainants had requested access to the television surveillance footage on June 20, 2018, and that the footage was provided on September 25, 2018. Wash World has stated that the material in question contained footage of a third party, which is why Wash World initially chose not to disclose the material to complaints. Wash World has regretted the lengthy processing time of the complainant's request.
3. Legal basis
According to Article 2 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation, [1] 1 applies to the processing of personal data which is wholly or partially processed by means of automatic data processing and to other non-automatic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register.
According to Article 15 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, the data subject has the right to obtain the data controller's confirmation as to whether personal data concerning the data subject is being processed and, where appropriate, access to the personal data and the following information:


the purposes of the treatment


the categories of personal data concerned


the recipients or categories of recipients to whom personal data is or will be disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or international organizations;


if possible, the intended period during which personal data will be stored or, if this is not possible, the criteria used to determine that period;


the right to request the data controller to correct or delete personal data or to limit the processing of personal data concerning the data subject or to object to such processing


the right to file a complaint with a supervisory authority


any information available from where the personal data originates, if not collected from the data subject


the existence of automatic decisions, including profiling, as referred to in Article 22 (2); 1 and 4, and at least meaningful information about the logic therein, as well as the significance and expected consequences of such processing for the data subject.


Pursuant to Article 15 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3, the data controller must provide a copy of the personal data processed.
It also appears from Article 12 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 3 that the data controller must inform the data subject without undue delay and in any case within one month of receipt of the request, of measures taken on the basis of a request pursuant to, inter alia, Article 15.
This period may be extended by two months, if necessary, taking into account the complexity and number of requests. The data controller shall inform the data subject of any such extension within one month of receipt of the request, together with the reasons for the delay.
Thus, there is an absolute deadline for responding to requests from a registrant of three months. The vast majority of requests, however, should not be considered complicated, so they must be answered within one month of receipt.
Section 22 of the Data Protection Act contains a number of exceptions to the data subject's right of access under Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation.
4. Justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision
The Data Inspectorate has assumed that, on September 25, 2018, Wash World responded to the complainant's request for insights.
Pursuant to Article 15 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, only information about the registered self must be provided in connection with a request for access.
Thus, if the television surveillance footage includes information about other persons, the data controller must blur or otherwise remove them, for example. by image cropping.
The Data Inspectorate finds grounds for expressing serious criticism that Wash World initially rejected the complainant's request for access, citing that the footage contained footage of a third party and that Wash World only provided a copy of the video surveillance material more than three months after the data subject's request.
5. Concluding remarks
Copies of this letter are sent to the complainant's briefing.
The Data Inspectorate hereby considers the case to be closed and thereafter does not proceed further in the case.


[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
