TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Life at Parliament View Limited

Regina House, 124 Finchley Road, London NW3 5JS

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Life at Parliament View Limited (“LPVL”) with a monetary penalty under
section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is
being issued because of a serious contravention of the Seventh Data

Protection Principle by LPVL.

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

The DPA implemented European legislation (Directive 95/46/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to the protection
of personal data. The DPA must be applied so as to give effect to that
Directive. Both the DPA and the Directive have since been repealed,
but the contravention at issue in this case took place while they were

still in force.

LPVL is a data controller, as defined in section 1(1) of the DPA in
respect of the processing of personal data. Section 4(4) of the DPA
provides that, subject to section 27(1) of the DPA, it is the duty of a

1
Information Commissioner's Office

data controller to comply with the data protection principles in relation
to all personal data in respect of which he is the data controller.

5) The relevant provision of the DPA is the seventh data protection
principle which provides, at Part I of Schedule 1 to the DPA, that:

“Appropriate technical and organisational measures shall be taken
against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal

data”.
6. Paragraph 9 at Part II of Schedule 1 to the DPA provides that:

“Having regard to the state of technological development and the
-.<cost of implementing any measures, the measures must:ensure a

level of security appropriate to -

(a) the harm that might result from such unauthorised or unlawful
processing or accidental loss, destruction or damage as are

mentioned in the seventh principle, and
(b) the nature of the data to be protected”.
8. Under section 55A (1) of the DPA the Commissioner may serve a data
controller with a monetary penalty notice if the Commissioner is satisfied

that -

(a) there has been a serious contravention of section 4(4) of the

DPA by the data controller,
Information Commissioner's Office

(b) the contravention was of a kind likely to cause substantial

damage or substantial distress, and
(c) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the data controller —
(a) knew or ought to have known -

(i) that there was a risk that the contravention would occur,

and

(ii) that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to
cause substantial damage or substantial distress, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Background to the case

LPVL, trading as ‘LIFE Residential’, describes itself on its website as an
estate agency offering services in lettings, sales and property

management.

In March 2015 LPVL integrated with a partner organisation which
offered a property letting transaction service. A component of the
integration process required the transfer of tenant data held on LPVL’s

server to the partner organisation.

In order to share and sync files with its partner organisation, LPVL set
up a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server. The Commissioner
understands the FTP server had previously been used to transfer
property photographs to another system, and that an agreement was
reached"jointly between LPVL, its systems provider, and the partner

organisation to repurpose this FTP.

LVPL indicated that it had intended the FTP to feature Microsoft Basic
Authentication, which would require a username and password in order
to allow file transfers. LVPL configured the FTP following online
guidance available on Microsoft’s website, which was wholly
inappropriate for the task LVPL was seeking to accomplish, given that it
allowed ‘anonymous access’ and also did not require encrypted

communications.

In following this guidance, LVPL inadvertently misconfigured the server
in relation to access controls, leaving a function known as ‘Anonymous
Authentication’ switched on. This permitted any individual to access the
server and the data of tenants without taking authentication steps,
such as username and password, from 4 March 2015 onwards. Access

restrictions were not implemented, so that all users, including
15.

16.

17.

18.

oD
1C O Qo
Information Commissioner's Office
anonymous users, had full access to the data stored on the server. The
FTP server was further misconfigured in that whilst approved data
transfers were encrypted, personal data transmitted to non-approved
parties was not. As such, transfers of personal data over FTP to non-

approved parties had the potential to be compromised or intercepted in

transit.

The exposed data on the server comprised 60 different document
categories, of which 52 contained personal data. LPVL informed the
Commissioner that the personal data of 18,610 unique individuals was

placed at risk.

The types of personal data potentially compromised included names,
phone numbers, e-mail addresses, postal addresses (current and
previous), dates of birth, income/salary, employer details (position,
company, salary, payroll number start date, employer address &
contact details), accountant’s details (name, email address & phone
number). It also contained images of passports, bank statements, tax
details, utility bills and driving licences of both tenants and landlords.
The majority of this information dated from 2014 onwards.

On 15 February 2017, the vulnerability was identified whilst LPVL was
conducting a review of the files on the server and immediate remedial

action was undertaken.

During the period of vulnerability (4 March 2015 - 15 February 2017)
LPVL confirmed that there had been 511,912 anonymous user logon
events from 1,213 unique IP addresses recorded in the FTP server logs.
The vast majority of these were repeated connections from the same
IP addresses, which it was suspected had been carried out

programmatically.
LD;

20.

21.

Beis

wD
1C O G
Information Commissioner's Office
LVPL has confirmed that the unique IP addresses detailed in paragraph

18 above issued a number of FTP commands, including deletion,

uploading, creation and removal of folders, and file renaming.

On 2 October 2017, LPVL was contacted by an individual who identified
themselves as a hacker. This individual claimed to possess information
relating to LPVL’s customers and issued a threat to release information
if a ransom was not paid. The individual also produced evidence
indicating that the personal information to which they had referred had
been accessed from the compromised server prior to detection and

remediation of the vulnerability.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the balance

of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute
a contravention of the DPA by LPVL and, if so, whether the conditions
of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The contravention

23.

24.

The Commissioner finds that LPVL contravened the following provisions
of the DPA:

LPVL failed to take appropriate technical and organisational measures
against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal data
in contravention of the Seventh Data Protection Principle at Part I of
Schedule 1 to the DPA.
25.

26.

27.

Information Commissicner’s Office

LPVL also failed to comply with the requirements set out in paragraph 9
at Part II of Schedule 1 to the DPA.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as

follows:

LPVL did not take steps to ensure that personal data on its network
was secured to a suitable standard due to gaps in the technical and
organisational measures in place at the time of the incident, in

particular:

LPVL used an inappropriate and insecure method to facilitate
access/transfers of large quantities of personal data to a third party;
The above failing was compounded by LVPL’s misconfiguration of the
FTP server, which left large quantities of personal data exposed to
unrestricted and unauthorised access. Even if user names and
passwords were enabled, this would not have secured the data to a
suitable standard;

Post configuration of the server, LVPL failed to monitor access logs,
conduct penetration testing or implement any system to alert LPVL of
downloads from the FTP server, which would have facilitated early
detection and containment of the breach;

Failure to provide staff with adequate and timely training, policies or
guidance either in relation to setting up the FTP server, or information

handling and security generally.

This was an ongoing contravention until LPVL took remedial measures
on 15 February 2017.

The Commissioner is satisfied that LPVL was responsible for this

contravention.
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

28. The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the

conditions under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the contravention

29. The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious.

30. This is because the personal data of over 18,000 individuals was placed
at risk. Whilst the data involved was not in itself sensitive, the nature
and type of personal data potentially compromised was sufficiently

wide ranging to enable identity and/or financial fraud.

31. Furthermore, given LPVL’s failure to detect the vulnerability until a
review of its IT system in February 2017, the data was exposed for a
period of almost two years. During this period, the data involved was
accessed over half a million times by over one thousand unauthorised
IP addresses, when modifications and alteration of some of the data

took place, thereby reducing its integrity.

32. Inthe circumstances, the Commissioner considers that the
contravention was serious having regard to the wide ranging nature of
the personal data involved and the potential consequences, the number
of affected individuals, the duration of the contravention, and the fact
that personal data was accessed and substantially amended on multiple

occasions by unauthorised users.

33. The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.
34.

35.

36.

37.

38,

ao.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ontraventions of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or

 

substantial distress

The relevant features of the kind of contravention are:

Wide ranging personal data of tenants (and to a lesser degree
landlords) could be accessed by unauthorised third parties over a

period of almost two years.

The Commissioner considers that the contravention identified

above had the following potential consequences:

The contravention would cause distress to the data subjects whose
confidential and personal data has been disclosed to a recipient who

has no right to see that information.

Further, the data subjects would be distressed by concerns that their
data has been further disseminated, even if those concerns do not

actually materialise.

If this information has been misused by those who had access to it, or
if it was disclosed to untrustworthy third parties, then the
contravention would cause further distress and also substantial
damage to the data subjects such as exposure to the risk of identity

and/or financial fraud.

The Commissioner has been unable to establish whether any of the
leaked data is still publicly available, given that it comprised mainly
scanned documents, which makes it difficult to run searches to locate
the data. The Commissioner considers that the distress suffered by

data subjects as described above would be exacerbated by concerns

9
40.

41.

42.

43.

@
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
that the data may still be in the public domain. This would especially be
the case in relation to some identity related documents which have a

long ‘life span’, such as passports, which are likely to remain current

and so there is greater potential for detriment.

LPVL received a complaint from a customer in April 2017 concerning
fraudulent applications made in his name shortly after using LPVL’s
services, including fraudulent credit applications which had adversely
affected his credit rating. Whilst LPVL was unable to conclusively link
the incident to this breach it is demonstrative of the risks posed to

individuals whose data is compromised in a contravention of this type.

The Commissioner considers that the damage and/or distress
described above was likely to arise as a consequence of the kind
of contravention. In other words, the Commissioner’s view is that
there was a significant and weighty chance that a contravention

of the kind described would have such consequences.

The Commissioner also considers that such damage and/or

distress was likely to be substantial, having regard to the number of
affected individuals and the broad nature of the personal data involved.
In the circumstances, the likely damage or distress was certainly more
than trivial. When forming this view the Commissioner has also paid
due regard to the prolonged duration of exposure of the personal data

involved.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

The Commissioner has considered whether the contraventions
identified above were deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this
means that LPVL’s actions which constituted those contraventions were
deliberate actions (even if LPVL did not actually intend thereby to
contravene the DPA).

The Commissioner considers that in this case LPVL did not deliberately

contravene the DPA in that sense.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contraventions
identified above were negligent. First, she has considered whether LPVL
ought reasonably to have known that there was a risk that these
contraventions would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is met,
given that LPVL was routinely used to handling large volumes of
confidential and personal data relating to tenants (and to a lesser
degree landlords). Therefore, LPVL should have been aware that such

information must be kept secure and handled appropriately.

| PVL stated that its intention had always been to implement password
protection to the FTP server, which would suggest to the Commissioner
that LVPL had some awareness that such personal data should have

been kept secure.

Indeed LPVL was a registered data controller with a data protection
policy in place, who was aware of and preparing for GDPR when the
breach was reported. As such the Commissioner is satisfied that LPVL
was aware of its obligations to maintain sufficient technical and

organisational measures to protect personal data.
49.

50.

ol.

B25

@
1C O oO
Information Commissioner's Office
In the circumstances LPVL ought reasonably to have known that the

files containing tenant’s personal data would be vulnerable to a security

breach in the absence of appropriate security measures.

The ICO has had longstanding guidance available prior to the incident
in the form of the ‘Data Sharing Code of Practice’ and ‘A practical guide
to IT security’ which included technical and organisational security
considerations around the sharing of data and keeping IT systems safe
and secure. Guidance issued in 2014 (Aittps://ico.org.uk/media/for-
organisations/documents/1042221/protecting -personal-data-in-online-

services-learning-from-the-mistakes-of-others.pdf) highlighted the
risks of using FTP for the transfer of personal data. In particular it

says: "Plain FTP should be avoided for transfer of personal data or
other confidential information; again because information, including
usernames and passwords, is sent unencrypted. Remember too that
FTP services can be configured to allow anonymous access which can
also be indexed by internet search engines.” This same guidance
makes direct reference to anonymous access being a risk. It is
considered that LPVL had ample opportunity to be aware of such
guidance and to take steps to act upon the advice they contained.

The ICO has also published details of regulatory action against other
data controllers in respect of similar incidents involving the use of FTP
servers to store and transfer personal data (e.g. HCA International
Limited - February 2017). LPVL had the opportunity to be aware of
these cases and the risks identified by the use of FTP servers to

transfer personal data.

Second, the Commissioner has considered whether LPVL knew or ought
reasonably to have known that those contraventions would be of a kind
likely to cause substantial damage or substantial distress. She is
satisfied that this condition is met, given that LPVL handled a

12
53.

54.

se)
ICO.
Information Commissioner’s Office
significant volume of tenancy related personal data and was aware of
nature of the personal data it handled. The types and classifications of
personal data transferred by LPVL via FTP are typically of a sort used
for individuals to enter into legally binding contracts/tenancy
agreements. By their very nature the personal data compromised in
this incident can be used to identify individuals, carry out background
checks, and conduct credit checks, and if handled maliciously would
enable a motivated individual to commit identity and financial fraud.
Therefore, it should have been obvious to LPVL that such a
contravention would be of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or

substantial distress to the affected individuals.

Third, the Commissioner has considered whether LPVL failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contravention. Again, she is satisfied
that this condition is met. Reasonable steps in these circumstances

would have included:

e Using a secure method to transfer large quantities of personal
data to its partner organisation;

e Implementation of access authentication controls/restrictions to
ensure personal data could not be accessed by others unless
authorised;

e Monitoring of access logs, penetration testing and setting alerts
for downloads from the FTP server, to enable early detection and
containment of a breach;

e Provision of adequate and timely training, policies or guidance to
staff in relation to FTP setup, and information handling and

security.

LPVL failed to take any of those steps. The Commissioner considers

that there was no good reason for that failure.
55.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (c) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to impose a monetary penalty

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

For the reasons explained above the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A(1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that section 55A(3) and the procedural rights under
section 55B have been complied with.

The latter has included issuing a Notice of Intent dated 11 June 2019 in

which the Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has received representations in response to the
Notice of Intent dated 2 July 2019 and has taken these into account
when making her final determination. The representations do not
dispute the contravention itself; more they highlight substantial
remedial action and investment in LPVL’s IT systems post-breach which
the Commissioner has already taken into consideration when issuing
her Notice of Intent (see mitigating factors at paragraph 61 below). In
any event the Commissioner’s view is that any such security should
already have been in place at the time of the contravention. LVPL also
point to the financial impact of the penalty on the company, however
this is not borne out by the information available to the Commissioner,

and LPVL did not provide any evidence in support of this assertion.

The Commissioner has taken into account the following aggravating

features of this case:

14
61.

62.

63.

o
ICO.
Information Commissioner’s Office

LPVL’s delay in reporting the breach to the ICO - the breach was

reported only after LPVL was contacted by the attacker in October

2017;

The longevity of the data was such that it could potentially be live

and usable data for a significant time after the breach (for example

10 years in the case of passports);

Failure to notify affected data subjects who have been unable to

take steps to protect themselves against identity and financial

fraud;

The Commissioner has also noted LPVL’s lack of policies in regards

to retention of data.

The Commissioner has also taken into account the following

mitigating features of this case:

Since 2016 and throughout 2017, LPVL has made significant
investment in improving its information systems, including cyber
security - it was during this review that the vulnerability was
detected. LPVL took immediate remedial action as soon as the

vulnerability was identified.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with the DPA and this is an
opportunity to reinforce the need for data controllers to ensure that
appropriate and effective security measures are applied to personal
data.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided

that the appropriate amount of the penalty is £80,000 (eighty

15
64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69,

1CcO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

thousand pounds).
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 15 August 2019 at the latest. The
monetary penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into
the Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account
at the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
14 August 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty
by 20% to £64,000 (Sixty four thousand pounds). However, you
should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

a) the imposition of the monetary penalty

and/or;
b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty
notice.
Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

16
O

1C QO.

Information Commissioner's Office
e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary penalty

must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary penalty has

not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any
variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

70. the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any In
England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 17th day of July 2019

 
  

Signed

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a right
of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’)
against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in accordance
with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by the
Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as could
have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the Tribunal will
dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the Tribunal
within 28 days of the date of the notice.
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it unless the
Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this rule.

4. The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative (if
any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the monetary
penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice of
appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the reason why
the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

5. Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may conduct
his case himself or may be represented by any person whom he may
appoint for that purpose.

6. The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of, and Schedule 6
to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
(General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No.
1976 (L.20)).

19