Resolution of the Conference of Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the
Federal and Länder - 12.09.2019

Digitization of the administration
compliant with data protection and citizen friendly!
The Federal Government wants to modernize and manage the registers kept in the administration
in

this

context

personal

Dates.

one
After

simpler

view

of the

access

on

conference

there
of the

saved
independent

Data protection supervisory authorities of the federation and the countries (data protection conference) may
this project does not lead to the introduction of uniform, cross-administrative
Personal identifiers or identifiers lead. Rather, the protection of the
Fundamental rights and freedoms, in particular the right to protection of personal rights
Data, have priority. It is equally important to give citizens the better ones
To offer services connected with a much higher transparency.
Federal Government attacks modernization of registries
The

Federal government

Has

With

the

Online Access Act

on

extensive

Digitization program for the administration in Germany started. Federation and countries are
In the future, it will also be obliged to provide its administrative services electronically via administrative portals
offer. User accounts are to be made available to users for the im
Portal network available electronic administrative services of federal and state governments
can identify uniformly.
In this context, the National Regulatory Control Council (NKR) has called for a
Modernization of the German register landscape and recommended that
Certain basic data of citizens and companies need only be communicated once
("Once only" principle). The NKR has also suggested that data protection compliant
Identification numbers for persons, companies as well as buildings, apartments and
To create and use parcels and set up a "data cockpit" in which the
Citizens may have in mind all state data flows.
The introduction of such identification numbers for persons is currently under the lead
of the Federal Ministry of the Interior, for building and homeland (BMI) of the federal government

tracked. In its 28th meeting on March 12, 2019, the IT Planning Council has the responsibility of the BMI
the guidelines for a modernization of the register landscape, and
the

"Suggestion

For

the

improvement

of

identity management

as

part

of the

Register modernization "and welcomed the intended project.

Privacy-friendly and transparent design for citizens
citizens
Already

the

creation

uniform

and

administrative border

Personal identifiers or identifiers and a corresponding infrastructure
The risk of sharing data is high
Dimensions easily gathered, linked and made into a comprehensive
Personality profile could be completed. The privacy conference points
suggest that the Federal Constitutional Court for decades the
Introduction and processing of such personal characteristics very narrow barriers
imposed as they are massive in the scope of the right to informational
Self-determination of affected citizens. Already the
Possibility of a comprehensive cataloging of citizens by
the state endangers the personality right, since it becomes one with humans
leading to an early adaptation of their behavior. Also the principles of
European General Data Protection Regulation and its rules on
Data protection compliant design sets uniform and cross-administrative personal identifiers narrow limits and requires appropriate
Guarantees for the protection of the rights and freedoms of data subjects.
In particular with regard to the planned use of modernized registers for
future census surveys and planned / modernized access rights of the
Security authorities need special protection of the affected
People. The high risks for the right to informational self-determination
must be in a comprehensive regulatory, but especially technical and
organizational concept to be met. Only then can the German and
safeguards required under European constitutional law.
The modernization of the registers has to be used from the beginning on
citizens to use the Online Access Act
provided by the use of once-stored data
2

facilitate. Moreover, it is of particular importance to the citizens
Citizens a much higher level than the current situation
To ensure transparency. A "data cockpit", like the NKR already
has to allow citizens to vote at any time
understand which registry holds what data about them, which authorities
accessed on itn and with which other data they were linked.
At the same time, it must be ensured that only
Citizens of the access is possible. On this basis, the
Digitization of the administration to be used, the informational power gap
between the state and citizens and to give them the
Clear use of their rights.
According to the data protection conference, this must be decentralized
Maintain register structure. The use of uniform, cross-administrative
personal identifiers
respectively.
identifiers
to
direct
Identification of citizens rejects the data protection conference. she
calls for alternative methods of unambiguous identification. In addition to matching over
the respective data record of the register would at best be sector-specific
Personal identification numbers that allow a clear identification,
unilateral governmental adjustment of data to the maximum
Transparency through, for example, a data cockpit allows the risk of
Reduce abuse and compromise and uniqueness of registers
guarantee.

3
