
                                    [pic]
                     HELLENIC DATA PROTECTION AUTHORITY

                                                            Athens 7-10-2019
                                                              Ref. No.: 6739

                                Press release

        Administrative fines imposed on a telephone service provider

  (1) Imposition of a fine for breach of the principle of accuracy and data
       protection by design when keeping personal data of subscribers

      The Hellenic DPA has received complaints from telephone subscribers of
the  Hellenic  Telecommunications   Organization   (“OTE”)   who,   although
registered in the OTE’s do-not-call register (according  to  Article  11  of
Law 3471/2006), they received unsolicited calls  from  third  companies  for
the promotion of products and services.
      The investigation of  the  case  showed  that  those  subscribers  had
submitted a portability request for the transfer of  their  subscription  to
another provider. As a consequence, OTE deleted their entries from  the  do-
not-call  register.  However,  when  those   subscribers   cancelled   their
portability request, there was no proper procedure to cancel  their  removal
from the register. Subscribers were listed as registrants  in  the  internal
system of the provider’s customer service, but their telephone numbers  were
not included in the register sent by OTE to  the  advertisers,  as  the  two
systems, due to the error in their interconnection, did not  have  the  same
content.
      The Authority found that this incident  affected  a  large  number  of
individual subscribers, as there was an infringement  of  Article  25  (data
protection by design) and Article 5 (1) (c) (principle of accuracy)  of  the
General  Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR).  It  therefore   imposed   an
administrative fine of EUR 200.000 on the basis of the  criteria  laid  down
in Article 83 (2) of the Regulation.

     Decision 31/2019 is available in Greek on www.dpa.gr ( “Decisions”

 (2) Imposition of a fine for failure to satisfy the right to object and the
    principle of data protection by design when keeping personal data of
                                 subscribers

            The Hellenic DPA has received complaints from the recipients  of
advertising  messages  from  OTE  concerning  their  lack  of   ability   to
unsubscribe from the list of recipients  of  advertising  messages.  In  the
course of the examination of  the  complaints  it  emerged  that  from  2013
onwards, due to a technical error, the removal from the lists of  recipients
of advertising messages did not operate for those recipients  who  used  the
“unsubscribe”  link.  OTE  did  not  have  the  appropriate   organisational
measure, i.e. a defined procedure by which it could  detect  that  the  data
subject’s right to object could not be satisfied.
             Subsequently,  OTE  removed  around  8.000  persons  from   the
addressees of the messages, who had  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  withdraw
from 2013 onwards. The Authority has found an infringement of the  right  to
object to the processing for direct marketing purposes (Article  21  (3)  of
the GDPR) as well as Article 25 (data protection by design) of the GDPR  and
imposed an administrative fine of EUR 200.000 on the basis of  the  criteria
of Article 83 (2) of the Regulation.

     Decision 34/2019 is available in Greek on www.dpa.gr ( “Decisions”



                                             Communications Department
