Half a year basic data protection regulation
Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection published
Guidance "Information obligations of the person responsible"

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 26.11.2018
Yesterday, on November 25, 2018, the General Data Protection Regulation and the new Bavarian Data Protection Act became half a year old. The
Bavarian administrations have meanwhile gained a lot of experience in dealing with the partly unfamiliar regulations. Old questions
reposition yourself, and many more questions are added. That makes itself
Also noticeable at the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection: The case numbers in the consulting inquiries are steadily increasing.
Therefore, preventative data protection work is of particular importance
to. The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection published
on its website https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de under
"Data Protection Reform 2018" continuously new information materials that
can also be conveniently obtained via RSS newsfeed.
One focal point of the consulting practice has been in recent months
the information duties of the person responsible. In many places right now
address existing uncertainties and fears
the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection has today
Guidance "Information obligations of the person responsible" available. Based on the consulting practice in the past six
Months, the relevant provisions of the General Data Protection Regulation are comprehensively and practically explained. The administrations also receive numerous drafting suggestions and text modules in order to meet the information obligations without unnecessary effort
to be able to.
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 26.11.2018 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri: "Different from the public discussion unfortunately
is repeatedly subordinated, serves the fulfillment of the information requirements
not for the purpose of fattening a bureaucratic monster. It is rather one
essential for citizens to know what kind of data they are processing, and therefore theirs
To actively exercise privacy rights. I am convinced that the
Bavarian state and municipal administrations their from the
Basic Data Protection Regulation
can meet a reasonable cost. My new orientation aid wants to lead with many help and practical examples. "
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
