09.04.2019Landesbeauftragte presents Activity Report Data Protection 2018 | 05/2019

Dagmar Hartge, Country Commissioner for Data Protection and the Right of Access to the Files, today publishes her Privacy Report for 2018:
For companies, administrations and associations, the past calendar year was dominated by the introduction of the new data protection law (Chapter I, No. 1, page 10). On May 25, 2018, the two-year preparation period ended. Since then, all those responsible have applied the Data Protection Regulation, which is directly applicable throughout Europe. This partly caused enormous uncertainty.
In numerous training events, we provided over 1,900 executives and data protection officers from administrations and companies with legal and technical-organizational innovations at almost 40 events (Chapter I, No. 2.1, page 12). In addition, there were numerous individual consultations, especially of small and medium-sized companies. These included, among other things, the future implementation of data subject rights, the limits of admissible advertising and the appointment of data protection officers (Chapter I, No. 2.2, page 13 and No. 2.7, page 21). Clubs, for example, inquired about the legitimate processing of their members' data and the conditions for sending newsletters (Chapter I, point 2.3, page 16). There were some special cases in the health sector: Some practices suddenly made the treatment dependent on whether the patient had previously voluntarily consented to the processing of the data - even though the treatment contract would have been sufficient as the basis for this. While a brief reference to the legal situation was usually sufficient here, our advice on the practical design of the new information requirements vis-à-vis the patients was more intensive (Chapter I, No. 2.4, page 17). Many of the inquiries and complaints we received regarding the privacy-friendly handling of photographs may have been due to the initially very generalized public debate. Although we believe that clearer legal regulations are desirable overall, in most cases they were all-clear. The changes were not that revolutionary; In particular, according to the old legal situation, the representation of persons required either their consent or a legal basis (Chapter I, No. 2.6, page 20). Dagmar Hartge:
In 2018, my staff members were fully engaged in answering inquiries, providing training and sometimes calming their minds. Not everything was new. On the contrary, it turned out that those who had previously treated data protection in a stepmotherly or stepfather way were now faced with the problem of having to implement everything at once.
Although the demand for counseling has declined in the meantime, it will continue to be an important task for our department.
Companies or administrations that run a Facebook fan page can not escape their data protection responsibility. This was decided by the European Court of Justice last year (Chapter IV, No. 1, page 64). For example, they must conclude certain agreements with Facebook and demonstrate in a comprehensible way that the processing of user data is compatible with the General Data Protection Regulation. As a rule, they will not be able to do this because Facebook has so far been neither sufficiently transparent nor specifically informed about it. The main criticism is the inscrutable processing of user data - even those of Fanpage visitors who are not even members of the social network. Under these conditions, the operation of Facebook Fanpages is unlawful. The conference of the independent data protection supervisory authorities of the federation and the countries has pointed this out recently. The country representative will feel responsible for those who run fanpages in the current year on the tooth.
In the past year, Facebook also engaged us in very specific complaints. For example, an employer published on the public Facebook profile of her former employee that she had several thousand euros in tax debts and therefore had to be deprived of her wages (Chapter IV, No. 2, page 66). It is obvious that such a denial goes far beyond the permissible under data protection law. The Land Commissioner has therefore imposed - still in accordance with old law - a fine in four figures.
In addition, authorities and companies repeatedly asked whether they could use the WhatsApp messenger service for their respective purposes for data protection purposes (Chapter IV, No. 3, page 66). Our answer was a clear no in all cases. Who uses WhatsApp, whose or their KOntaktdaten (phone book) reads WhatsApp automatically and stores the data on the company's own servers. Consents of the persons concerned are unlikely to be available for this purpose. Dagmar Hartge:
At the latest, the Facebook integration of WhatsApp, Instagram, Messenger and Facebook's Messenger services was designed to encourage businesses and government agencies to seek alternatives. I recommend using only those communication channels that are under your own control and that guarantee secure, confidential communication.
The amendment of the Brandenburg Police Law caused intense discussions in 2018 (Chapter V, No. 1.1, page 82). Some far-reaching powers of intervention - such as electronic security surveillance and the so-called online search - were removed from the bill even before the parliamentary debate. Later, the criticism of the Land Commissioners on the originally planned, but also also deleted monitoring of messenger services (source telecommunications monitoring - "source TKÜ") was heard. Nevertheless, the law just passed by the Landtag extends the police data processing powers in the result substantially. In particular, counter-terrorism interventions are already permitted in the run-up to a specific threat, so that uninvolved parties can more easily get into police focus. We also consider the disproportionately lengthy extension of the retention period for police video recordings from two days to two weeks as we see it to be.
During the review of the Police Injury Management System for Authorities and Organizations with Security Matters ("ELBOS"), we identified several violations of data protection law during the reporting period (Chapter III, No. 1, page 54). For example, thousands of employees were able to read mission logs or carry out searches in already completed operations. Among other things, a more restrictive allocation of access rights as well as encryption of sensitive personal data were missing.
Together with the Berlin colleagues, we controlled the Clinical Cancer Registry of the states of Brandenburg and Berlin (Chapter III, No. 3, page 59). Above all, we were interested in whether the technical and organizational measures required for efficient data protection had been taken. We also reviewed the procedures and procedures for processing social data. The security of the premises and the handling of the paper documents were not objectionable in the result. However, among other things, a comprehensive deletion concept was missing; In addition, report reports submitted by post - contrary to the rules - were completely scanned and permanently stored electronically.
Compared to public authorities, the so-called complaint until the introduction of the General Data Protection Regulation was the most important instrument for data protection supervision. In the first half of 2018, the country commissioner used it several times. For example, she objected to the integration portal of a job center (Chapter II, No. 3, page 44). Using this portal, the county periodically submitted vulnerable beneficiary social data to a contracted company that reported suitable vacancies to the job center. Although there was no data protection-appropriate procedural concept for this and the own IT security officer doubted the legality, the district introduced the procedure. His promises to make improvements were made in the Brandenburg countryside. Only after the state commissioner, in their complaint, promised to document the procedure, based on the new data protection law, did the Jobcenter terminate the operation of the portal. This speaks not least of the effectiveness of the additional supervisory powers vis-à-vis public authorities.
The new data protection law provides for a wider range of data protection supervisory tools even before an order is issued: a warning indicates to the person responsible that the intended data processing is likely to infringe the General Data Protection Regulation; a warning in the case of a previous infringement corresponds to the previous complaint. The Land Commissioner issued a warning to a court after the list of voters had been sent to too large a circle of recipients in the election of the Committee of Honorary Judges and it could not be ruled out that this mistake would be repeated in the future (Chapter II, No. 4 , Page 45). We warned a horse riding provider who informed the parents of the children about the cancellation of their booking (Chapter II, No. 5, page 48). He did so using an open mailing list so that all recipients could see all the addresses.
With the privacy policy
4446/5000
The cooperation of the European data protection supervisory authorities has intensified considerably (Chapter VII, No. 4, page 116). The processing of complaints about the cross-border processing of personal data is carried out using an EU-wide electronic register, in which all these cases are closed for transnational processing. Since 25 May 2018, the country representative has had to examine a total of 597 cross-border cases to see whether we are involved in the processing. In 55 cases, we did so because the person in charge had a branch in Brandenburg or the reported processing of personal data could have a significant impact on citizens of our state. In one case we took the lead. Another 18 complaints we received have been reported to the registry; In 36 cases, we participated in the development of a common position. Dagmar Hartge:
The elaborate and exclusively English-language voting procedure between the European supervisory authorities is new to all involved. The European regulator has responded with its establishment to the recognition that the processing of personal data does not stop at state borders. The aim of the procedure - a uniform application of the GDPR in all Member States - was and is an important element of the data protection reform.
However, a modus operandi both in dealing with the register and in the cross-border voting has yet to establish itself.
The General Data Protection Regulation provides for a significant tightening of the obligation to inform the supervisory authority in the event of a breach of data protection (Chapter VII, No. 3, page 116). As a result, the number of privacy breaches since May 25, 2018 has risen massively. By the end of the year, we had received a total of 124 reports according to the new legal situation. Much of the cases involved the misdirection of documents; For example, the theft of the digital camera was reported to a day care center with children's photos and the loss of a file that a public agency employee had forgotten when driving on the car roof. Attacks on computer networks, where personal data were captured, also took a significant stake. The new regulation forces responsible persons in many such cases to inform the persons concerned about what has happened. The purpose of the extended reporting requirement is to make companies, administrations and associations aware of the fact that they take measures on their own initiative to ensure data protection - if only so as not to attract attention to the data protection supervisory authority.
As in previous years, we again saw a significant increase in video surveillance complaints and inquiries during the reporting period (Chapter VII, No. 1, page 112) to a total of 118 cases. 87 of them we have processed as a complaint. Partly it concerned the monitoring of the publicly accessible area, partly the complaints were connected also with long-standing neighborhood disputes. Examining a video surveillance system is particularly complicated if several cameras are used. This is often the case for companies. Here we have to evaluate for every single camera whether it meets the requirements of data protection. Alone due to the complaints we have checked in this way in the past year 360 video cameras.
The General Data Protection Regulation has not yet affected the extent of the fine proceedings carried out by the Land Commissioner (Chapter VII, No. 5, page 118). Since misdemeanors are always to be assessed according to the law in force at the time of their commission, most of the new procedures from 2018 still concern the old legal situation.
Finally, a note on its own behalf: So far, the country representative has shared their activity report for both data protection and access to the file every two years. The new rules on data protection law mean that we now publish our annual report on data protection every two years and the report on file inspection every two years.
 
 

Responsible:
Sven Müller
