1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

To: Vote Leave Limited
Of: Portland, 25 High Street, Crawley, West Sussex RH10 1BG

a The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Vote Leave Limited (“Vote Leave”) with a monetary penalty under
section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is in
relation to a serious contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy and

Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”).

Bus This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

3. Vote Leave, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 09785255), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
transmitted unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to
individual subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to
regulation 22 of PECR.

4. Regulation 22 of PECR states:
o

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
‘“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited

communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A-subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
ee)
1C O i)
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) PECR as “any text, voice,
sound or image message sent over a public electronic communications
network which can be stored in the network or in the recipient’s
terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and includes

messages sent using a short message service”.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements
of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person,
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that the

contravention would occur, but

3
10.

11.

12.

Information Commissioner's Office

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

Mobile phone users can report the receipt of unsolicited marketing text
messages to the GSMA’s Spam Reporting Service by forwarding the
message to 7726 (spelling out “SPAM”). The GSMA is an organisation
that represents the interests of mobile operators worldwide. The
Commissioner is provided with access to the data on complaints made
to the 7726 service and can assess this data to ascertain organisations

which may be carrying out activities in breach of PECR.
13.

14.

LS

16.

17.

18.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Between 1 January 2016 and 23 June 2016, 26 complaints were made
to the 7726 service about the receipt of unsolicited direct marketing
text messages. Between 18 June 2016 and 12 July 2016, 6 further
complaints were made direct to the Commissioner using the ICO Online

Reporting Tool.

It was apparent to the Commissioner that the content of the text
messages received by subscribers promoted the aims of Vote Leave,
with the majority of the messages containing a link to

“voteleavetakecontrol.org”, a website operated by Vote Leave.

The Commissioner identified the Caller Line Identity (“CLI”) from which
the text messages originated, and sent a Third Party Information
Notice (“TPIN”) to the Communications Service Provider of that CLI in

order to confirm the identity of the sender.

The response to the TPIN identified another communications provider,
‘Esendex’, whom it appeared had acted as a facilitator for the sending

of the direct marketing text messages using the aforementioned CLI.

It was disclosed by Esendex that a total of 212,355 text messages
were sent using that CLI during the relevant timeframe (that being 1
January 2016 and 23 June 2016), with 196,154 of those being

delivered.

Since the content of the messages promoted the aims of Vote Leave,
on 11 September 2018 the Commissioner sent an initial letter to them
regarding concerns about their Regulation 22 PECR compliance, and
requesting evidence of the consent relied upon by Vote Leave for the

marketing campaign which it appeared to have instigated.
19.

20.

21.

22.

ZS

24.

oO
1CO.
Information Commissioner's Office
A series of correspondence followed between the Commissioner and
Vote Leave’s legal representatives, with a response being forthcoming
on 17 October 2018 in which it was stated that the direct marketing
messages had actually been sent directly by Vote Leave, via Esendex’s

sister brand, ‘TextMarketer’.

In explaining where the data used by Vote Leave for the marketing
campaigns came from, it was claimed by Vote Leave’s legal
representatives that the data was obtained from enquiries which had
come through on Vote Leave website; from individuals who had
responded via text to promotional leaflets; and from entrants to a
football competition. However, following the conclusion of the
referendum campaign, Vote Leave deleted this data together with
details of the CLIs used, the volume of messages sent, volume of
messages received, and any evidence of consent relied upon to

instigate messages to those individuals which had made a complaint.

Vote Leave were unable to provide any evidence of consent for any of

the 196,154 messages which they accepted had been sent.

As a part of the Commissioner’s wider investigations, an interview was
conducted with a former Vote Leave employee who corroborated the
account as detailed above provided by Vote Leave’s legal

representatives.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute
a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by Vote Leave and, if so,

whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
25%

20:

27.

28.

29.

30;

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Vote Leave has contravened regulation 22
of PECR.

“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents
to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.
Indirect, or third party, consent can be valid but only if it is clear and

specific enough.

Paragraph 44 of the Commissioner’s Direct Marketing Guidance states
that “Direct marketing is not limited to advertising goods or services
for sale. It also includes promoting an organisation’s aims and ideals.
This means that the direct marketing rules in the DPA and PECR will
apply to the promotional, campaigning and fundraising activities of not-

for-profit organisations”.

The Commissioner is of the view that the content of the messages falls
within the definition of direct marketing as set out under Section 11(3)
DPA.

The Commissioner therefore finds that the contravention was as

follows:

Between 1 January 2016 and 23 June 2016, Vote Leave used a public
electronic telecommunications service for the purposes of transmitting
196,154 unsolicited communications by means of electronic mail to
individual subscribers for the purposes of direct marketing contrary to
regulation 22 of PECR. The Commissioner is of the view that Vote
Leave were responsible for at least the instigation of those unsolicited

communications.
31.

32.

33.

34.

J.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

In this case the Commissioner is not satisfied that Vote Leave has been
able to demonstrate the requisite consent, within the meaning of
regulation 22(2), of the subscribers whom had received the 196,154
unsolicited direct marketing text messages. The Commissioner has
been provided with no evidence to suggest that the exception afforded

under regulation 22(3) would apply in this instance.

The Commissioner is satisfied that Vote Leave was responsible for this

contravention.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because between the dates of 1 January
2016 and 23 June 2016, Vote Leave sent a total of 196,154 direct
marketing text messages to subscribers without their consent. This
resulted in 26 complaints being made. It is further noted that the
Commissioner logged a further 6 complaints about unsolicited
communications from Vote Leave between the period of 18 June 2016
and 12 July 2016.

The scale of the contravention could have been even larger as Vote
Leave was in fact responsible for the sending of 212,355 direct

marketing text messages.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate or, in the alternative, negligent.

The Commissioner considers that in this case Vote Leave did not
deliberately contravene regulation 22 of PECR, but was negligent. In
the Commissioner’s view, this means that whilst Vote Leave was
responsible for the transmission of direct marketing messages to

subscribers, there is no evidence that they intended to breach PECR.

The Commissioner has therefore gone on to consider whether the
contraventions identified above were negligent. First, she has
considered whether Vote Leave knew or ought reasonably to have
known that there was a risk that these contraventions would occur.

She is satisfied that this condition is met, not least because the issue of
unsolicited text messages has been widely publicised in the media as

being a problem.

Furthermore, the Commissioner has published detailed guidance for
those carrying out direct marketing explaining their legal obligations
under PECR. This guidance explains the circumstances under which
organisations are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text,
by email, by post, or by fax. In particular it states that organisations
can generally only send marketing texts to individuals if that person
has specifically consented to receiving them from the sender. The
Commissioner has previously directed Vote Leave to this guidance, and

has given specific advice to them as to their legal duties under PECR.

)
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

i)
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner is further persuaded that Vote Leave was aware of
its legal obligations since in its application to register as a designated
lead campaigner in the 2016 referendum, Vote Leave indicated that
“ (they) only send marketing material to non-supporters within the

terms of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive)
Regulations 2003 SI 2003/2426.”

It is therefore reasonable to suppose that Vote Leave was aware of the
existence of PECR, and knew or ought reasonably to have known that
there was a risk that these contraventions would occur when engaging

in direct marketing.

Second, the Commissioner considered whether Vote Leave failed to

take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

Reasonable steps in these circumstances could have included putting in
place appropriate systems and procedures to ensure that it maintained
records of the specific consent of those to whom it had sent marketing
text messages; and adequately recording the source of the data used.
Furthermore, it would be reasonable to have expected Vote Leave to
take steps to retain details as to the CLIs used for its direct marketing,
and volumes of the messages sent so as to be able to adequately

address any subsequent queries as to the validity of its marketing.

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that Vote Leave

failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

10
47.

48.

49.

50.

Silks

a2.

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetar enalt

 

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by Vote Leave on this matter.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty.

The Commissioner has considered the likely impact of a monetary
penalty on Vote Leave. She has decided on the information that is
available to her, that Vote Leave has access to sufficient financial
resources to pay the proposed monetary penalty without causing

undue financial hardship.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of
unsolicited marketing texts is a matter of significant public concern. A
monetary penalty in this case should act as a general encouragement
towards compliance with the law, or at least as a deterrent against
non-compliance, on the part of all persons running businesses currently

engaging in these practices. The issuing of a monetary penalty will

1]
53.

24.

pi

56.

a.

Information Commissioner's Office

reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only texting

those who consent to receive marketing.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £40,000 (forty thousand pounds) is
reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 19 April 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
18 April 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £32,000 (thirty two thousand pounds). However, you

should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty

and/or;
58.

Do.

60.

61.

Information Commissioner's Office

(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.
ICO.

Information Commlssioner’s Office

Dated the 19% day of March 2019

signed cP —

Andy White

Director of High Profile Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

14
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

35 You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

15
a)

D)

Information Commissioner’s Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule,

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

16
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

17