The new emergency for global privacy is called the app economy. The limits and risks of a commercial system in which the general contract conditions, unilaterally established by digital companies, end up defining the perimeter of rights and freedoms. Intervention by Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (&quot;Il Foglio&quot;, 12 January 2019) To the director - The &quot;App economy&quot; is one of the sectors of the current growing economic system, which today employs 1.8 million people only in Europe and whose value, in terms of turnover, is estimated to grow exponentially in the coming years, but we can also consider the expression &quot;app economy&quot; as one of the most appropriate definitions of the digital economy, in which a significant part of the commercial exchanges it is conveyed through applications downloaded by consumers, for various purposes, on smartphones, tablets, etc. In most cases, the apps provide services for free or, better, requesting a non-pecuniary consideration: the data. They are used to construct consumer profiles useful for effectively directing the marketing activity and therefore represent, both an important asset from an economic point of view, and the object of a fundamental right. Within the innumerable types of applications offered by the digital market, those that allow information on the number entered to be typed in recently are proliferating, drawing on a database fed by the users themselves, who insert the contacts from their own address book. Think, for example, of Sync.Me. The operation of these applications - the suppliers of which are often established in non-European countries - arouses interesting reflections, both in the individual and in the system case. As for the privacy profiles, I would like to report a series of critical issues. First of all, with respect to the limits of consent. Even assuming that it is actually acquired, one must ask whether it is really informed and therefore if the user has real awareness of the use made of the data provided. In the absence of adequate information, in fact, the consent itself could not be considered validly given, with the resulting consequences in terms of sanctions and the uselessness of the information thus acquired. And if all this concerns the limits of the user&#39;s consent to the processing of their data, further critical issues raise the issue of the transfer of the contacts of the address book. The user cannot validly dispose of these - handing them over to a supplier who will use them in a commercial context - without the consent of the third party. This circumstance highlights the limits and risks of a commercial system in which the general contract conditions, unilaterally established by digital companies (or by big tech companies with innumerable &quot;third parties&quot;), end up defining the perimeter of rights and freedoms. Ed highlights how - often unconsciously - the users themselves become victims and at the same time perpetrators of offenses, letting not only their data, but also those of third parties, be used as valuable goods (but at no cost) by companies of the digital users Users must be aware of how the transfer of information relating to other persons, in the absence of their consent, constitutes an offense sanctioned even seriously, and, as regards the transfer of their data, in exchange for small or large utilities provided by the app, they must be aware of the risks (in terms of identity theft, unauthorized access, etc.) of a similar trading system ale, which feeds on the monetization of those precious fragments of freedom that are personal information. There is then to consider the geopolitical impact on the market structure and transparency, typical of similar commercial systems, with companies located mainly outside the European Union and in real data paradises, much more elusive and &quot; submerged &quot;than fiscal ones. And, perhaps, even more dangerous, if we consider that in the digital dimension there are now hostilities between subjects, between states and between&quot; blocs &quot;of nations and powers. Now, in terms of privacy, extra-European localization would not be impeding the application of the GDPR, for which it is sufficient to offer goods or services to people in the EU. This circumstance will therefore not prevent the European data protection authorities from conducting preliminary investigations and, if necessary, sanctions. However, the undeniable difficulty of the enforceability of such measures remains, compared to subjects towards whom, in the event of non-fulfillment, it is quite problematic not only to resort to the penal sanctions provided for non-compliance, but also more banally to effectively carry out inspection activities. To overcome these aporias it is essential to recognize, at the international level, the right to the protection of personal data and the guarantees necessary to ensure their effectiveness. In a global context such as that of the network, founded on interdependence and on the overcoming of borders and borders, the protection of rights can only be equally global and based on homogeneous guarantee levels.