Report of "data breaches"
at Bavarian authorities
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection published
a new orientation guide "obligation to report and duty of notification of the responsible person".

Press release - page 1/2
Munich, 05.06.2019
Since the data protection reform in 2018, a year has now passed. The innovations include a reporting obligation for data breaches and a
Obligation to inform persons concerned, which intervenes in particularly serious cases. The Bavarian public authorities of the state as well as of the non-state, in particular of the municipal area meet these obligations.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri: "Due to the numerous incoming reports from me, 'data breakdowns' creates a situation picture, data security in Bavaria',
which enables targeted preventative data protection work. The reports cause me regularly to make recommendations to the
reporting public bodies. The level of data security is thus continuously improved. Affected citizens
also receive information from a mandatory notification
to effectively exercise their rights. "
On the basis of the experience gained so far, the Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection has published the orientation guide "Obligation to Report and Notify the Responsible Person",
which takes up numerous doubts and the relevant regulations
the basic data protection regulation as well as the Bavarian state law
for the Bavarian administrative practice. Doing it
The guidance clearly shows that not every violation of data protection regulations, but only a breach of security
Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release dated 05.06.2019 - page 2/2
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

personal data triggers the reporting and, if necessary, the obligation to notify. It continues to provide advice-seeking public bodies
Recommendations for simplified risk analysis and use
of the date of application of the General Data Protection Regulation
Online entry form.
The new orientation guide is available today at https://www.datenschutzbayern.de in the category "Data Protection Reform 2018" for free retrieval
provided.
Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.
