Results of the 97th Conference of the
independent data protection supervisory authorities of the Federal and the Länder am
3-4. April 2019 at the Hambach Castle
Privacy activists decide Hambacher declaration
to Artificial Intelligence
Press release - page 1/3
Munich, 08.04.2019

The 97th Conference of Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the
Federal and Länder met on 3 and 4 April 2019 on the Hambacher
Lock.
Among other things, the DSK has commented on the following topics:
Hambach Declaration on Artificial Intelligence
One focus of the conference was the discussion about Artificial Intelligence (AI). The German data protection supervisory authorities have
passed the Hambach Declaration on Artificial Intelligence. she
gives an example of the use of AI systems in medicine, in particular in diagnosis, language assistance and the evaluation of
Application documents in the selection of candidates. From the current data protection law, seven requirements are derived, already today
must be complied with. Thus, the use of AI systems must be comprehensible and explainable, contain the principle of data minimization, avoid discrimination and require technical and organizational support.

Your right to privacy - our mission

Press release from 08.04.2019 - page 2/3
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

satorial standards. The data protection supervisory authorities want to accompany the development and call on science, politics and users,
to steer the development of AI in terms of data protection. At the core
the point is that in the end people and not machines decide on people.
The resolution is available here:
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de/dsbk-ent/DSK_97Hambacher_Erklaerung.html
Brexit - precautions of regulators on an unregulated
Britain leaves the EU
The DSK has discussed the consequences of an unregulated Brexit.
Already on March 8, 2019, she passed a resolution to the
legal duties of those responsible in the event of an unregulated
Exit indicates. In the event of an unregulated exit, the United
Kingdom as a third country within the meaning of the General Data Protection Regulation
consider and there leading data transfers are accordingly
to secure separately. In the absence of such safeguards, data processing could be suspended and fines imposed.
The decision is available here:
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de/dsbk-ent/DSK_96p-Brexit.html
Hacker Attack - Guidance for providers of online services
In response to the hacker attack on politicians as well
Public figures in January 2019, the privacy advocates have adopted an orientation guide "Requirements for operators of online services to secure access". In it online services are measures to secure access to the state of the art

Press release dated 08.04.2019 - Page 3/3
The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection informed

recommended. This applies to specifications for setup, transmission, storage
and password usage, handling attacks and failed login attempts.
The orientation guide is available here:
https://www.datenschutz-bayern.de/dsbk-ent/DSK_97-Online-Dienste.pdf

Prof. Dr. Thomas Petri

The Bavarian State Commissioner for Data Protection checks compliance with data protection regulations at the Bavarian public authorities. He is from the Bavarian
Diet elected, independent and not bound by instructions.

The Privacy Conference consists of the Independent Data Protection Supervisors of the
Federal and states. The 97th Conference took place on 3 and 4 April 2019 at the Hambacher
Castle held. The annually rotating chairmanship hosts the sessions of the Privacy Conference
and represents the conference externally. In 2019, the country commissioner for data protection and
freedom of information Rhineland-Palatinate presides.
