To:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

True Visions Productions

49a Oxford Road South, London, W4 3DD

The Information Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) has decided to
issue True Visions Productions (“TVP”) with a monetary penalty under
section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is
being issued because of a serious contravention of the First Data

Protection Principle by TVP.

The period of breach occurred between 24 July 2017 and 29 November
2017 and is accordingly considered by the Commissioner under the

DPA and not the legal regime in force from 25 May 2018.

This Notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

TVP is a data controller, as defined in section 1(1) of the DPA in respect
of the processing of personal data. Section 4(4) of the DPA provides
that, subject to section 27(1) of the DPA, it is the duty of a data
controller to comply with the data protection principles in relation to all

personal data in respect of which he is the data controller.
Di

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The relevant provision of the DPA is the first data protection principle
which provides, at Part I of Schedule 1 to the DPA, that:

“Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully and, in

particular, shall not be processed unless—
(a) atleast one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and

(b) in the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the

conditions in Schedule 3 is also met.”
Under section 55A(1) of the DPA the Commissioner may serve a data
controller with a monetary penalty notice if the Commissioner is

satisfied that —

(a) there has been a serious contravention of section 4(4) of the
DPA by the data controller,

(b) the contravention was of a kind likely to cause substantial

damage or substantial distress, and
(c) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the data controller —

(a) knew or ought to have known -
10.

Informatlon Commissioner's Office

(i) that there was a risk that the contravention would occur,

and

(ji) = that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to

cause substantial damage or substantial distress, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section
55C(1) of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that

has been published on the ICO’s website. The Data

Protection (Monetary Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and

Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe that the amount of any

penalty determined by the Commissioner must not exceed £500,000.

The DPA implements European legislation (Directive 95/46/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to the protection
of personal data. The Commissioner approaches the data protection

principles so as to give effect to the Directive.

The Facts

Between 24 July 2017 and 29 November 2017, TVP placed static, fixed,
CCTV-style cameras and accompanying microphones in three of the
four rooms of Clinic 23 in the Maternity Assessment Unit at
Addenbroke’s Hospital. Addenbroke’s is run by the Cambridge
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (“the Trust”).

TVP are a television production company. They had installed the

cameras with the permission of the Trust for the purpose of filming

3
11.

12.

13.

14.

D
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
patients at the Clinic for a documentary on still births. The production
was being developed for Channel 4. Still births are a highly emotive
and sensitive topic, and the Commissioner takes no issue with the

public interest in thoughtful documentary programmes exploring the

impact of such experiences in order to educate and inform.

Clinic 23 is for walk-in patients who are pregnant with concerns about
foetal development and movement. Patients will be assessed by a
midwife and may need further assessment by an obstetrician. This will
take place in the clinic rooms in which the cameras were placed. In a
minority of cases, patients attending the Clinic will have correctly
identified a serious health issue with their foetus, which may result in a
still birth.

By definition, the footage captured by the cameras would include the
sensitive personal data of the patients. Indeed, the very purpose of the
filming was to capture some of the most private and traumatic personal
data any person may experience. It is similarly highly relevant that a
patient attending Clinic 23 will be doing so because they are concerned
about the health of their foetus: they will be suffering from anxiety and
stress and their attention will be focussed on the health of their foetus

and their need to obtain medical assistance.

Yet TVP did not directly and specifically inform patients attending the
Clinic that they would be filmed. Consent was not sought from patients
in advance. Production staff from TVP were not in the Clinic

throughout; they attended three-four days a week.

Rather, TVP posted filming notices in the immediate vicinity of the
cameras, and the waiting room area, informing those who read the

notices that the hospital was taking part in a film about complex

4
15.

16.

8
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
pregnancies. Generalised letters were left on tables in the waiting room
area to similar effect. Staff at the Clinic did not draw the attention of

patients to the fact of the filming, although they had been instructed to

answer questions about the filming if asked.

TVP provided samples of the notices and letters to the Commissioner

with its representations in response to the Notice of Intent.

(a) Two generalised letters on Trust letterheads were provided,
explaining the filming taking place by TVP. Neither letter explains
that if a patient does not wish to be filmed whilst being
examined, she would need to request to be seen in the one
consultation room not fitted with a fixed camera. Nor does either
letter explain that any examination in the other rooms will be

filmed.

(b) One notice produced for display by the Trust explains that the
hospital was hosting TVP who were making a film about complex
pregnancies. The notice stated that “Wo mums or visitors will be

filmed without permission.” This was not accurate.

If a patient became aware of the filming and objected to it, there was
no mechanism by which the cameras could be stopped. Although a
version of TVP’s ‘Shooting Protocol’ supplied to the Commissioner with
its representations appears to envisage that the cameras will be able to
be stopped by staff, the cameras eventually installed were not fitted
with any stop button. Instead, the patient would have to request to be
treated in the one room in which cameras were not located. If that
room was not available, as happened on at least one occasion, the only

way in which the privacy and wishes of the patient could be respected
L/.

18.

19,

20.

21.

Information Commissioner’s Office

was to cover the camera by unsuitable means, such as taping carrier

bags over it.

TVP have explained that the footage collected was automatically stored
on a protected computer system and was not viewed by any TVP
employee unless consent had been provided by the patient concerned.
Footage would be automatically deleted after three days if it did not
involve a still birth incident, or if it did but the patient did not consent

to the use of the footage.

Approximately five patients per day would have been seen in each
clinic room, totalling approximately 1,990 affected data subjects during
the filming period. TVP says that all of the footage has been destroyed.

The Commissioner became aware of the issue when patients who
objected to and were distressed by the filming complained to the press
— including the BBC - on or about 29 November 2017. Following the
press coverage, filming ceased on 29 November 2017. As a result of
the Commissioner becoming aware of the issue, she commenced an
investigation into the processing and liaised with the Trust, TVP and
Channel 4.

Subsequent to the publicity, and the ceasing of filming, TVP
recommenced filming for the documentary using hand-held cameras
and continued until spring 2018. The documentary was subsequently
transmitted on Channel 4 on 8 October 2018, and received positive

press coverage.

In response to the Notice of Intent, TVP explained - and the
Commissioner accepts — that the filming process it adopted in the Clinic
was decided upon following engagement with the relevant clinicians of
the Trust and of the Clinic. It is not clear to the Commissioner, and TVP

6
2
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
have provided no records in this respect, as to the extent to which the
eventual choices were adopted on the basis of specific advice from or
insistence of clinicians, or were developed jointly. In any event, the
manner in which filming was carried out was ultimately a matter for
TVP, which was able to adopt different filming techniques after
November 2017 and produce a successful documentary. Where
appropriate, the Commissioner will address the content of this point in

her analysis of the statutory tests.

22. The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the balance

of probabilities.

23. The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of the DPA by TVP and, if so, whether the conditions of
section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The Contravention

24. The Commissioner finds that TVP contravened the following provision
of the DPA:

25. TVP failed to process the personal data of patients at the Clinic fairly,
lawfully and in accordance with a condition in Schedules 2 or 3, in
contravention of the First Data Protection Principle at Part I of Schedule
1 to the DPA.

26. The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as

follows:

27. Although TVP has emphasised that no human had access to the footage

collected, the filming and audio recording within the Clinic, and the
28.

29.

30.

Information Commissioner's Office

retention and storage of that footage for a period of time, was the

processing of personal data within the meaning of the DPA.

The personal data processed by TVP was sensitive personal data within
the meaning of section 2(e) DPA. It concerned highly personal health
information about the state of the patient’s pregnancy and foetus, and
would have included details of medical consultations, advice and

intimate examinations.

The processing was not fair. A patient attending the Clinic would not
have reasonably expected there to be fixed cameras which could not be
stopped in examination rooms. A patient would reasonably expect such
filming expressly to be drawn to her attention. TVP did not provide
sufficient fair processing information to patients, and did not
sufficiently draw the information which was provided to the attention of
patients, having regard to the terms of paragraph 2 of Part II of
Schedule 1 to the DPA. It was not sufficient or fair in all the
circumstances -— including, in particular, the inevitable anxiety and
stress of patients attending the Clinic and the focus of their attention
being on the health of their foetus and obtaining medical assistance -
for TVP to rely on limited notices posted underneath the cameras, and
generalised letters on waiting room tables. This conclusion is enhanced
further when the limited and misleading content of some of those

letters and notices is taken into account.

The Commissioner also has regard when considering fairness to the
terms of Ofcom’s ‘Broadcasting Code’ (2017) (issued under the
Communications Act 2003 and the Broadcasting Act 1996), with which
TVP is expected to comply. Paragraph 8.8 of the Code includes the

guidance that:
5,

32.

33.

9

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
“in potentially sensitive places such as ambulances, hospitals, schools,
prisons or police stations, separate consent should normally be
obtained before filming or recording and for broadcast from those in
sensitive situations (unless not obtaining consent is warranted). If the

individual will not be identifiable in the programme then separate

consent for broadcast will not be required.”
Paragraph 8.16 of the Code provides that:

“Broadcasters should not take or broadcast footage or audio of people
caught up in emergencies, victims of accidents or those suffering a
personal tragedy, even in a public place, where that results in an
infringement of privacy, unless it is warranted or the people concerned

have given consent.”

Although the Broadcasting Code does not purport to set absolute rules,
the Commissioner does not consider that TVP’s processing is consistent
with the standards set by the Broadcasting Code and this contributes to

the unfairness of the processing.

For materially similar reasons to those concerning fairness, above, the
processing was also not lawful because it constituted a gross invasion
of privacy which was an unjustified and disproportionate interference

with the Article 8 rights of the patients filmed.

As to compliance with a Schedule 3 condition, the only condition
identified by TVP is that of “explicit consent”. The Commissioner
considers it to be absolutely clear that patients cannot be said to have
given their explicit consent to being filmed in the above circumstances.
This is regardless of whether or not TVP would have sought such

consent before broadcasting the footage obtained.

9
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner is not able to identify any other Schedule 3
condition which might justify the processing of TVP and TVP has not

Suggested any.

It is not necessary to address in detail the Schedule 2 conditions, but
the Commissioner does not accept that any Schedule 2 condition is met

either.

TVP has relied upon section 32 DPA on the grounds that its processing
was with a view to the publication of journalistic material, for which
publication would be in the public interest. The Commissioner accepts
that TVP was processing for journalistic purposes and does not dispute
the public interest in programming about the traumatic implications of

still births. Sections 32(1)(a) and (b) are accordingly engaged.

However, the Commissioner does not accept that section 32(1)(c) is
satisfied. This requires that TVP reasonably believes that, in all the
circumstances, compliance with the First Data Protection Principle was
incompatible with journalistic processing. That test cannot be met in

the circumstances of this processing.

TVP has emphasised in its representations that in N71 v Google LLC
[2018] EWHC 799 (QB); [2018] 3 WLR 1165 at paragraph 102, Warby
J held that section 32(1)(c) requires there to have been a subjective
belief on the part of TVP, and that that belief be objectively reasonable.
Although this passage is ob/ter, the Commissioner accepts it. She
accepts, for the purpose of this Notice, the assertions of TVP that it
held the subjective belief (whilst noting that some of the

documentation provided to her is not wholly consistent with that
39.

40.

41.

42.

Information Commissioner's Office

conclusion). The Commissioner’s concern remains that such a belief

was not objectively reasonable.

The central argument of TVP is it, informed by its work with the clinical
staff of the Trust, was entitled to take the view that to seek prior
consent would (a) risk distressing patients; (b) distract clinical staff
from their duties; and (c) risk a delay in the provision of medical

treatment.

This argument is an extremely concerning one to the Commissioner
and she does not accept that it is objectively reasonable, whether or

not it aligns with the views of Trust employees at the time.

The argument from distress at (a) betrays the logical fallacy in TVP’s
position. If it would unduly risk distress to patients to inform them that
they were being filmed and to ask for their consent, it must also be the
case that the fact of filming would be likely to distress patients. It is a
tacit recognition that had patients been informed of the filming they
would have been likely to be distressed and object to it. The simple fact
of asking the question would not be the cause of the distress in most
cases: it would be knowledge that filming was taking place of a very
sensitive moment. Processing of personal data which is distressing is
not lawfully rendered less distressing by the means of not informing
the data subject that the processing is occurring. TVP is not entitled to
rely on the patient’s focus on their and their foetus’ health so that they
will not notice or pay no attention to such information that was posted

or available around the Clinic.

The argument from clinical staff time at (b) is also not reasonable. It
was a matter of choice for TVP that its production staff were not on-site

at all times that filming was taking place. Had they been, it would not

11
43.

44,

45.

46.

Information Commissioner’s Office

have been necessary for the time of clinical staff to have been

materially taken up with explanations and discussions of the filming.

As to (c), while it would clearly not be acceptable to delay urgent
medical treatment for a discussion of filming consent procedures, the
necessity for properly informed consent in such circumstances cannot
reasonably lead to the answer that the filming occur anyway. Such
cases are precisely the ones in which the greatest sensitivity and

clearest consent is reasonably required.

In any event, TVP’s argument is no answer to why the fixed cameras
could not be stopped on request of the patient, or why it was justified
to film every patient in three Clinic rooms despite TVP’s own case being
that almost all of those cases would not result in relevant footage. The
Commissioner notes, in particular, that TVP’s representations accept
that it would have been possible to have a stop button on the fixed
cameras; had production staff been on-site it would not have been
necessary to leave stopping the cameras to clinicians and in any event
the Commissioner cannot accept the assertion that the clinician
pressing a stop button could seriously interfere with them carrying out

their medical responsibilities such as to have been impractical.

In the Commissioner’s view, TVP’s processing was inconsistent with the
standards of the Broadcasting Code, above, to which the Commissioner

is entitled to have regard in this respect under section 32(3).

That compliance with the First Principle was compatible with the
purpose of journalistic processing, and that TVP ought reasonably to
have known it to be so, is also to be inferred from the facts that: (a)
upon complaints being made in the press by patients, filming
immediately ceased; and (b) TVP was able on 8 October 2018 to

screen its intended documentary —- to wide acclaim — without the use of

12
Information Commissioner's Office

any of the unlawful footage but by use of properly consented footage

and interviews.

47. Inall the circumstances, any belief of TVP that compliance with the
First Data Protection Principle was incompatible with the purposes of

journalism was not objectively reasonable.

48. The contravention occurred between 24 July 2017 and 29 November

2017, inclusive.

49. The Commissioner is satisfied that TVP was responsible for this

contravention.

50. The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the

conditions under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the Contravention
51. The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified
above was serious. The processing was of highly sensitive personal
data of a substantial number of data subjects.
52. Inthe circumstances, the Commissioner considers that the
contravention was serious having regard to the number of affected

individuals and the nature of the personal data involved.

53. The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) of section
55A(1) DPA is met.

Contraventions of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or
substantial distress

13
54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

595

9
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
The relevant features of the kind of contravention are that TVP has
filmed and audio recorded nearly 2,000 patients undergoing medical
examinations and assistance in relation to concerns the patient had
about the health of their foetus, and that that filming and recording

was made without prior consent and without clearly and expressly

being drawn to the attention of the patient.

The Commissioner considers that the contravention identified above

had the following potential consequences:

The contravention would cause distress to patients who may suspect
that their highly sensitive personal data and intimately private medical

history has been filmed and recorded without their knowledge.

In this context it is important to bear in mind that the very purpose of
the patients attending the Clinic was their concern about the health of
their foetus and filming of the medical assistance they were provided

with would be intensely private, potentially traumatic and particularly

distressing.

The Commissioner considers that the damage and/or distress described
above was likely to arise as a consequence of the kind of
contravention. In other words, the Commissioner’s view is that there
was a Significant and weighty chance that a contravention of the kind

described would have such consequences.

The Commissioner considers that that conclusion is borne out by the
complaints made by patients to the press in November 2017, in which
language of real concern and upset was used. She finds it surprising
that TVP would seek to place reliance in its representations on those

patients not having expressed strong concerns to it: a patient

14
60.

61.

62.

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
attending the Clinic will have as their first priority the welfare of their
unborn child and not a complaints mechanism about unexpected
filming. Although the Trust, TVP and Channel 4 have informed the
Commissioner that no formal complaints have been received, the
Commissioner is also conscious that many patients who did not see the

press coverage in late November 2017 may still be unaware that they

were ever filmed by TVP.

The Commissioner also considers that such distress was likely to be
substantial, having regard to the number of affected individuals and
the nature of the personal data involved. In the circumstances, the

likely damage or distress was certainly more than trivial.

The Commissioner has also given weight to the number of affected
individuals. The Commissioner considers that even if the distress likely
to have been suffered by each affected individual was less than
substantial, the cumulative impact would clearly pass the threshold of
“substantial”. In addition, given the number of affected individuals and
the nature of the data involved, it was inherently likely that at least
some of those individuals would have been likely to suffer substantial

distress on account of their particular circumstances.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) of section
55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

63.

The Commissioner has considered whether the contraventions
identified above were deliberate, but has concluded that she does not
have a sufficient basis to find that TVP deliberately contravened the
DPA.

15
64.

65.

66.

67.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contraventions
identified above were negligent. First, she has considered whether TVP
knew or ought reasonably to have known that there was a risk that
these contraventions would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is
plainly met, given that TVP was or should have been used to the
particular sensitivities of filming within a hospital environment and the
especially distressing likely context of that filming. TVP was or should
have also been aware that its approach was not consistent with the

Broadcasting Code.

In the circumstances, TVP ought reasonably to have known that its
processing was not fair, lawful or in accordance with the required
statutory conditions, and that it was not incompatible with the
journalistic purpose it was pursuing to fail to comply with the DPA in

that respect.

Second, the Commissioner has considered whether TVP knew or ought
reasonably to have known that those contraventions would be of a kind
likely to cause substantial damage or substantial distress. She is
satisfied that this condition is met, given that TVP was aware of the
nature of the personal data being filmed and processed, and that that
was the very purpose of the processing. Therefore, it should have been
obvious to TVP that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to
cause substantial damage or substantial distress to the affected

patients.

Third, the Commissioner has considered whether TVP failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contravention. Again, she is satisfied
that this condition is met. Reasonable steps in these circumstances

would have included: prior consent to filming; expressly drawing the

16
68.

69.

70.

71.

®
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Oifice
attention of patients to the fact of filming; patients being able to
request filming be stopped in their case, including the provision of a
stop button on the camera; filming only taking place when production
staff were present and could explain and control the filming; and TVP
carrying out their own privacy impact assessment prior to any filming.

TVP failed to take any of those steps to ensure a fairer processing

context.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (c) of section
55A(1), read with section 55A(3), DPA is met.

The Imposition of a Penalty

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty.

In circumstances where the statutory conditions for the imposition of a
monetary penalty are met, the Commissioner would ordinarily expect
to impose such a penalty to ensure that the rights of data subjects are
enforced and that data controllers more generally are able to learn

from the compliance failures of others.

She has in this case considered the representations of TVP that ought
not to impose a penalty having regard to TVP’s Article 10 ECHR rights,
and their willingness to learn lessons. The Commissioner does not
doubt the latter, but would expect future compliance with the DPA as a
bare minimum from all controllers. She accepts that TVP was exercising
its Article 10 rights when filming and that its business engages Article
10 rights more generally. However, nothing in the DPA or the Directive
requires those carrying out journalistic processing to be completely

immune from compliance with data protection law, or enforcement

17
72%

73.

74.

von

Information Commissioner’s Office

where there has been non-compliance. Rather, the Commissioner has

had regard to Article 10 in setting the level of the penalty.

She does not consider that there is any basis to conclude that issuing a
monetary penalty in the terms proposed in this Notice would affect
economic growth, and in any event, such a penalty would be

appropriate in all the circumstances.

The Amount of the Penalty

The Commissioner has taken into account the following mitigating

features of this case:

The footage has been destroyed.
TVP has explained that it adopted its approach following close liaison
with the Trust and its clinical view.

TVP has co-operated with the Commissioner.

The Commissioner has also taken into account the following

aggravating features of this case:

There was no formal or informal data protection or privacy impact
assessment undertaken in advance of filming by TVP itself, reaching its
own conclusions on the appropriate balances to be struck.

The Commissioner had to commence her own investigation and was
not notified of the matter by TVP.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with the DPA and this is an

opportunity to reinforce the need for data controllers to ensure that
76.

Td.

78.

Fo.

80.

Information Commissioner's Office

processing of sensitive personal data is fair, lawful and in accordance

with the statutory conditions.

The Commissioner has had regard to the financial information provided
by TVP. Although the proposed monetary penalty is not intended to
cause undue financial hardship, it must nonetheless be set at a level

commensurate with the seriousness of the contravention.

The Commissioner has also, as set out above, had regard to the
context of the processing in issue involving the exercise of Article 10
rights and the importance Article 10 gives to the protection of

journalistic activities in the public interest.

Accordingly, and in the light of the representations of TVP in this
respect, the Commissioner has decided that a penalty in the sum of
£120,000 (one hundred and twenty thousand pounds) is
reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner's office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 9 May 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government's general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
8 May 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £96,000 (ninety six thousand pounds). However, you
should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

12
81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

Informatlon Commissioner's Office

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty
notice.
Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days
of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary
penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any
variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 8' day of April 2019

20
Signed

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5SAF

21

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55A-55E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

ls Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
Zs If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

a You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8D)

De
a)

b)

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

23
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

24