Te:

Of:

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Avalon Direct Limited

Unit A2 Brooke Court, Handforth Dean, Wilmslow, Cheshire SK9 3ND

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Avalon Direct Limited (“ADL”) with a monetary penalty under section
55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is being
issued because of a serious contravention of regulation 21 of the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations
2003.

This notice explains the Commissioner's decision.

Legal framework

ADL, whose registered office is given above (Companies House
Registration Number: 10646254) is the organisation stated in this
notice to have used a public electronic communications service for the
purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing

contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.
9
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
4. Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct
marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls
promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone
number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
5. Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
6. Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.
@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls
being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them

that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The TPS is a limited company
set up by the Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish
to carry out direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for

a fee and receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

Under section 55A (1) of the DPA (as amended by PECR 2011 and the

Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
10.

11.

Information Commissioner's Office

2015) the Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty

notice if the Commissioner is satisfied that —

“(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements of the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations

2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person -

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implemented European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR were amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
1

13:

14.

15.

16.

Information Commissioner's Office

strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches the

PECR regulations so as to give effect to the Directives.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

ADL came to the attention of the Commissioner following an article in
the ‘Mail on Sunday’ newspaper on 19 November 2017 which alerted
the Commissioner to allegations of unscrupulous sales and trading
practices by an organisation called Plan My Funeral Avalon Limited
(“PMFAL”).

On 20 November 2017 a letter was sent to PMFAL setting out the

Commissioner’s concerns regarding the organisation’s compliance with
PECR in light of the media report, and also following earlier compliance
advice which had been given to two of the directors of the company in

respect of a separate investigation.

On 28 November 2017 PMFAL changed its name by resolution with
Companies House to ADL. (For the purposes of this Notice, the
organisation shall herewith be referred to as ADL, even for that period
when it would have identified as PMFAL.)

On 11 December 2017 the Commissioner received a response from the
representatives of ADL which explained a little about the corporate
structure of ADL, and its subsidiaries. Furthermore, the letter provided
some information regarding the way by which ADL had contracted with
a lead provider to acquire leads for the purposes of its telesales

marketing.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

It was confirmed by ADL’s representatives that there had been a total
of 5,413,396 calls made between 1 March 2017 and 20 November
2017 using leads generated by their lead provider.

The Commissioner sent a further letter on 21 December 2017 to the
representatives for ADL to request details of the websites from which
the lead generator obtained the personal data used by ADL for their
marketing. In addition, copies of the fair processing statements used
by the lead generator were requested to demonstrate what individuals

were told at the point when their data was obtained.

A response was received by the Commissioner on 15 January 2018
advising her of the websites used to gather the personal data used for
ADL’s campaign, and also providing copies of the fair processing

statements used.

Consideration of these websites, and the fair processing notices relied
upon, showed that neither ADL or PMFAL (which was the trading name
by which the organisation operated at the material time) were
adequately identified so as to constitute sufficient consent to engage in

direct marketing calls.

The Commissioner wrote again to the representatives of ADL on 22
January 2018 requesting confirmation in respect of the call figures
having noted discrepancies in some of the information which had

previously been provided.

The Commissioner received a response on 16 February 2018 indicating
that, although calls would have initially been made by ADL, if the call
was not answered within the first few days, the individual’s details

would be called thereafter by a dialler system.
23)

24.

Ao.

26.

Ze.

28.

29:

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Subsequent correspondence advised the Commissioner that a total of
2,046,745 direct marketing calls were made on behalf of ADL to valid
numbers, of which 134,142 were connected. ADL provided

spreadsheets to evidence these call volumes.

TPS checks of the numbers dialled revealed that, of the 134,142
connected calls, 53,447 calls were made to TPS registered numbers,
with 51,917 of those being to numbers registered with the TPS for not
less than 28 days.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of regulation 21 of PECR by ADL and, if so, whether the

conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
The contravention

The Commissioner finds that ADL has contravened regulation 21 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 1 March 2017 and 20 November 2017, ADL used a public
telecommunications service for the purposes of making 51,917
unsolicited calls to unique numbers for direct marketing purposes to
subscribers where the number allocated to the subscriber in respect of
the called line was a number listed on the register of numbers kept by

the Commissioner in accordance with regulation 26, contrary to
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these 51,917 unsolicited direct marketing calls were made to
subscribers who had registered with the TPS at least 28 days prior to
receiving the calls, and they had not given their prior consent to ADL to

receive calls.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA are met.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because there have been multiple breaches
of regulation 21 by ADL arising from the organisation’s activities over a
9 month period, and this led to a significant number of unsolicited
direct marketing calls being made to subscribers who were registered
with the TPS.

The 51,917 unsolicited direct marketing calls were not screened
against the TPS register, nor is there any evidence of sufficient consent
being provided to ADL or their lead generator from the individual
subscribers. There is also no evidence of sufficient due diligence checks

being carried out by ADL to ensure the veracity of the data being used.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions
35.

36.

a7.

38.

39%

Qo

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified
above was deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this means that
ADL’s actions which constituted that contravention were deliberate

actions (even if ADL did not actually intend thereby to contravene
PECR).

The Commissioner considers that in this case there is evidence that

ADL did deliberately contravene regulation 21 of PECR.

The Commissioner considers that the making of the calls was a
deliberate act and that the inadequacies outlined were more than
matters of serious oversight. She has published detailed guidance for
those carrying out direct marketing explaining their legal obligations
under PECR. This guidance explains the circumstances under which
organisations are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text,
by e-mail, by post, or by fax. Specifically, it states that live calls must
not be made to subscribers who have told an organisation that they do
not want to receive calls; or to any number registered with the TPS,

unless the subscriber has specifically consented to receive calls.

The Commissioner’s direct marketing guidance also makes clear that
organisations utilising marketing lists from a third party must
undertake rigorous checks to satisfy themselves that the personal data
was obtained fairly and lawfully, that their details would be passed
along for direct marketing to the specifically named organisation in the

case of live calls, and that they have the necessary consent.

The Commissioner notes that two of the directors of ADL at the time of
the alleged contravention had previously been subject to a separate
ICO investigation and that their company in that instance had received

a civil monetary penalty in January 2018 for carrying out unsolicited
40.

41.

42,

@
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
direct marketing. Furthermore, those same directors were also the
directors of the lead generator utilised by ADL for the data collection in

this present matter so it is reasonable to suppose that ADL had at least

two directors who were conversant with their obligations under PECR.

Further and alternatively the Commissioner has also gone on to

consider whether the contraventions identified above were negligent.

She has considered whether ADL knew or ought reasonably to have
known that there was a risk that these contraventions would occur.
She is satisfied that this condition is met, given the way in which ADL
sourced its data and the fact that the issue of unsolicited calls was
widely publicised by the media as being a problem. It is reasonable to
suppose that ADL should have been aware of their responsibilities in
this area, particularly given the previous enforcement action taken

against two of their directors for a breach of the same regulation.

Secondly, the Commissioner has gone on to consider whether ADL
failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions. Again,
she is satisfied that this condition is met. Reasonable steps in these
circumstances would have included asking its lead generator for
evidence that the subscribers had consented to receiving calls from
ADL specifically, screening the data against the TPS register itself
regardless of any assurances that might have been given by the
providers of the data, and ensuring that it had in place an effective and
robust suppression list. Given the volume of calls, and the fact that
repeat calls appear to have been made to TPS registered numbers
without the appropriate consent, it is clear that ADL failed to take those

steps.
43.

44,

45.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetar enalt

 

The Commissioner has taken into account the following mitigating

features of this case:

The two directors whose organisation had previously been subject to

separate ICO enforcement action have since been dismissed by ADL;

There have been no complaints received by the ICO notwithstanding

the conduct outlined in this Notice.

The Commissioner has also taken into account the following

aggravating features of this case:

The presence of two directors who were plainly aware of their
obligations under DPA and PECR means that it is reasonable for the
Commissioner to find that ADL as an organisation were acutely aware
of the steps necessary to ensure valid consent for their direct

marketing campaigns.

The nature of the calls being made, i.e. regarding funeral planning, are
reported to have been made to particularly vulnerable people and so
whilst it is not a necessity of PECR that the requirements of damage
and distress are met, it is a consideration which the Commissioner is

obliged to bear in mind.

1]
46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

®

1C QO.

Information Commissioner's Office
For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is

also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by ADL’s legal representatives on this matter.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making of
unsolicited direct marketing calls is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity
to reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

telephoning consumers who want to receive these calls.

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided

that a penalty in the sum of £80,000 (eighty thousand pounds) is

12
52.

53.

54.

ah

36,

Information Commissioner's Office

reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 15 May 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
14 May 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £64,000 (sixty four thousand pounds). However, you
should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

57. The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

58. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland
Dated the 12" day of April 2019.

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SKY 5AF

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1, Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

Db) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3 You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ
a)

b)

Information Commissioner’s Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

17
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).