PRESS RELEASE

May 24, 2019

1st IFG-Days Baden-Württemberg
IFG = Freedom of Information Act
"Freedom of information is a fundamental right and, in short, means nothing other than
the right of anyone to look into the files of the public administration.
So in the files of the town hall, the youth welfare office, the health insurance, the employment office, the schools, .... To be able to inspect. And without a specific reason, without a long application and in principle for free. Everyone! explains, Stefan
Brink, Country Representative for Data Protection and Freedom of Information.
Freedom of information stands for a modern, open administration, which does not rely on knowledge of authority, but on transparency, dialogue and openness.
The Freedom of Information Act has been launched in Baden-Württemberg since 2016 - from
the public largely unnoticed.
"It's about to change! Freedom of information is a fundamental right and fundamental rights
can not be used intensively enough! "said the country representative.
Therefore, the State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information together with the IF platform FragDenStaat cordially invites you to the 1st IFG-Days BadenWürttemberg!
The two-day event offers a colorful and creative mix of lectures,
Workshops, individual consultations, rooms for thought, barcamps and an exciting one
Battle. Not to mention an award-winning competition from the craziest, funniest IFG request ever and a shared evening cinematic session.

Königstraße 10a · 70173 Stuttgart · Telephone 0711 615541-0 · Fax 0711 615541-15 · pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de · PGP Fingerprint: E4FA 428C B315 2248 83BB F6FB 0FC3 48A6 4A32 5962

-2-

Among them are Stefan Wehrmeyer from FragDenStaat, Johannes Enssle, Baden-Württemberg Nature Conservation Association, Ivan Aćimović, City of Freiburg, Hans Jannö, Swedish Chamber of Commerce, Oliver Rack, Open Government Partnership Baden-Württemberg working group - to name only a few.
And we will not only discuss and exchange, we will also do a lot
Have fun with each other !, Stefan Brink adds with a smile.
We will fill the LIFG of Baden-Württemberg with life together! In order to
we can say tomorrow:
Freedom of information? Yes, Baden-Württemberg can!
The country representative looks forward to you, your participation and your ideas!

What:

1st IFG-Days Baden-Württemberg

when:

Thursday, June 6, 2019 and Friday, June 7, 2019

Where:

in the premises of
National Center for Political Education Baden-Württemberg,
Lautenschlagerstraße 20, 70173 Stuttgart

who:

Country Representative for Data Protection
and freedom of information
Baden-Wurttemberg
in co-operation with:
Landeszentrale für politische Bildung Baden-Württemberg
and
FragDenStaat

One more request: register so that we can better prepare and plan
- under KULT@LfDI.bwl.de - a short e-mail is enough!
And a note: The number of seats is limited!
Further information can be found on our homepage at:
https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/einladung-zu-den-ersten-ifg-daysin-bawue/
If you have any questions, please contact us at 0711 / 615541-0.
Further information on data protection can be found on the Internet at
www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or under www.datenschutz.de.
