press release
711.412.1
November 5, 2019
Berliner Datenschutzbeauftragte imposes fine on real estate company

On October 30, 2019, the Berlin commissioner for data protection and freedom of information against
Deutsche Wohnen SE received a fine of around 14.5 million euros
Infringements of the General Data Protection Regulation (DS-GVO).

For on-site inspections in June 2017 and in March 2019, the Inspectorate found that
the company for the storage of personal data of tenants
used an archive system that provided no possibility for data that was no longer required
remove. Personal data of tenants were saved without
Check if storage is allowed or even required. In appraised
In some cases, therefore, some years old private data of affected tenants could
Tenants are consulted without this being the purpose of their original collection
served. It concerned data on the personal and financial circumstances of
Tenants, such. Salary certificates, self-disclosure forms, extracts
from employment and training contracts, tax, social and health insurance data as well as
Bank statements.

After the Berlin data protection officer in the first test date 2017 the urgent
The company was able to change the archive system
in March 2019, more than one and a half years after the first test date and nine months after
The beginning of the application of the General Data Protection Regulation, neither a correction of their
Dataset still have legal reasons for the continued storage. Although had
the company made preparations to eliminate the detected grievances.
However, these measures did not lead to the establishment of a lawful state in the
Storage of personal data. The imposition of a fine for a

Spokeswoman: Dalia Kues
Office: Cristina Vecchi
E-Mail: presse@datenschutz-berlin.de

Friedrichstr. 219
10969 Berlin

Tel: 030 13889 - 900
Fax: 030 2155050

-2-

Infringement of Article 25 (1) of the GDPR and Article 5 of the GDPR for the period between
May 2018 and March 2019 was therefore mandatory.

The General Data Protection Regulation obliges the supervisory authorities to ensure that
Fines in each individual case not only effective and proportionate, but also
are deterrent. The starting point for the calculation of fines is therefore u. a. of the
Worldwide sales of affected companies achieved in the previous year. Due to the in the annual report
Deutsche Wohnen SE for 2018 reported annual sales of over one billion
Euro was the statutory framework for calculating the fine for the detected
Privacy violation at about 28 million euros.

For the concrete determination of the fines the Berlin data protection officer has under
Consideration of all aspects of the burden and relieves the legal criteria used.
The main negative factor here was that Deutsche Wohnen SE objected to them
Archive structure had been deliberately created and the affected data over a long period in
were processed improperly. Fines mitigating, however, was taken into account that
The company certainly took initial action with the aim of cleansing the illegal
State and formally cooperated well with the regulator. Also with
Look to the company for any improper access to the inadmissible
As a result, a fine in the middle
Range of the prescribed fine.

In addition to the sanctioning of this structural violation imposed the Berlin
Data Protection Officer against the company even more fines between 6,000 -
17,000 euros for the inadmissible storage of personal data of tenants
and tenants in 15 concrete individual cases.

The fine decision is not yet final. Deutsche Wohnen SE can appeal against
appeal the fine.

Maja Smoltczyk:
"Data cemeteries, such as those we found at Deutsche Wohnen SE, are encountered
unfortunately in the supervisory practice often. The explosiveness of such abuses is unfortunately always first
then clearly demonstrated when it, for example through cyber attacks, to abusive

-3-

Access to the massively hoarded data has come. But even without such
We have serious consequences here with a blatant violation of the
Principles of data protection to do that the person concerned just before such risks
to protect. It is pleasing that the legislator has introduced the possibility of sanctioning such structural deficiencies with the General Data Protection Regulation,
before the data glitch comes. I recommend to all data processing agencies, theirs
Data archiving on Vereverifiability with the DS-GVO. "
