International Working Group
on Data Protection
in Telecommunications
711.405.1

October 9, 2019

PRESS RELEASE
Berlin Group publishes working paper on smart devices for children and privacy
of children in online services

The International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications (so-called Berlin Group),
headed by the Berlin Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information, Maja Smoltczyk
has adopted two working papers at its 65th meeting in April 2019 in Bled (Slovenia),
which were published today.
The Working Document on protecting the privacy of children in online services shows typical
Privacy risks associated with using online services for children. It's calling
providers to establish transparency and to obtain effective parental consent in the processing of child data. There are also recommendations for policymakers, online service developers and regulators.
The working paper on the privacy risks of smart devices for children examines typical problems related to so-called smart toys: lack of transparency, security vulnerabilities, unlawful data processing and possible adult abuse of toys for surveillance purposes. The working paper makes recommendations for addressing these issues for all stakeholders: manufacturers, users, schools and public authorities.
The working papers are available at https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/infothek-undservice/veroeffentlichungen/working-paper/.
About the International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications (Berlin Group)
The International Working Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications (International Working
Group on Data Protection in Telecommunications - IWGDPT, also known as the "Berlin Group", consists of
Representatives of data protection authorities and organizations from around the world who are involved with the
To occupy privacy. The working group was founded in 1983 as part of the International Data Protection Conference on the initiative of the Berlin State Data Protection Authority, which has since chaired it
leads. Since its inception, the Working Group has made a number of recommendations ("Common Positions").
and "working papers") on improving the protection of privacy in telecommunications. Since the beginning of the nineties, the group has been particularly concerned with the protection of privacy on the Internet.
Further information about the working group and the documents adopted by the group are available
the working group website: https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/datenschutz/zusammenarbeitund-gremien/
Secretariat
Berlin Commissioner for
Privacy and Freedom of Information
Friedrichstr. 219
D-10969 Berlin
Phone +49 / 30/13889 0
Fax:
+49 / 30/215 5050

E-mail:
IWGDPT@datenschutz-berlin.de
Internet:
http://www.berlin-privacy-group.org

The Working Group has been initiated
by Data Protection Commissioners
from different countries in order
to improve privacy and data protection
in telecommunications and media
