10:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Bounty (UK) Limited

29 Broadwater Road, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, AL7 3BQ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Bounty (UK) Limited (“Bounty”) with a monetary penalty under section
55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is being
issued because of a serious contravention of the first data protection
principle (“DPP1”) from Schedule 1 to the DPA.

Bounty contravened DPP1 by sharing the personal data of over 14
million individuals to a number of organisations including credit
reference and marketing agencies without informing those individuals
that it might do so. As a result Bounty processed that personal data
unfairly and without satisfying any processing condition under Schedule
2 to the DPA.

The amount of the monetary penalty which the Commissioner has
decided to issue is £400,000.

This Notice is served under section 55B of the DPA. It explains the
grounds on which the Commissioner has decided to issue the monetary

penalty. The Commissioner has considered written representations
Information Commissioner’s Office

from Bounty dated 19 February 2019 and 8 March 2019 in response to

the Notice of Intent before reaching a final decision on this matter.

Legal framework

The DPA implemented European legislation (Directive 95/46/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to the protection
of personal data. The DPA must be applied so as to give effect to that
Directive. Both the DPA and the Directive have since been repealed,
but the contravention at issue in this case took place while they were

still in force.

Bounty is a data controller, as defined in section 1(1) of the DPA in
respect of the processing of personal data. Section 4(4) of the DPA
provides that, subject to section 27(1) of the DPA, it is the duty of a
data controller to comply with the data protection principles in relation

to all personal data in respect of which he is the data controller.
The relevant provision of the DPA is DPP1 which provides that:

Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully and, in
particular, shall not be processed unless -

(a) at least one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and
(b) in the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the
conditions in Schedule 3 is also met.

Interpretative provisions in Part II of Schedule 1 to the DPA provide

in relevant part that:

1.- (1) In determining for the purposes of the first principle
whether personal data are processed fairly, regard is to be had to
the method by which they are obtained, including in particular
whether any person from whom they are obtained is deceived or
misled as to the purpose or purposes for which they are to be

2
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

processed.

(denon

2. - (1) Subject to paragraph 3, for the purposes of the first
principle personal data are not to be treated as processed fairly
unless -

(a) in the case of data obtained from the data subject, the data
controller ensures so far as practicable that the data subject has,
is provided with, or has made readily available to him, the
information specified in sub-paragraph (3), and

(b) in any other case, the data controller ensures so far as
practicable that, before the relevant time or as soon as
practicable after that time, the data subject has, is provided with,
or has made readily available to him, the information specified in
sub-paragraph (3).

(2) In sub-paragraph (1)(b) “the relevant time” means -
(a) the time when the data controller first process the data, or

(b) in a case where at that time disclosure to a third party within
a reasonable period is envisaged -

(i) if the data are in fact disclosed to such a person within that
period, the time when the data are first disclosed,

(ii) if within that period the data controller becomes, or ought to
become, aware that the data are unlikely to be disclosed to such
a person within that period, the time when the data controller
does become, or ought to become, so aware, or

(iii) in any other case, the end of that period.

(3) The information referred to in sub-paragraph (1) is as
follows, namely-

(a) the identity of the data controller,

(b) if he has nominated a representative for the purposes of this
Act, the identity of that representative,

(c) the purpose or purposes for which the data are intended to be
processed, and

(d) any further information which is necessary, having regard to
the specific circumstances in which the data are or are to be
processed, to enable processing in respect of the data subject to
be fair.

3. - (1) Paragraph 2(1)(b) does not apply where either of the

3
Q
] C O ©
Information Commissioner's Office
primary conditions in sub-paragraph (2), together with such

further conditions as may be prescribed by the Secretary of State
by order, are met.

(2) The primary conditions referred to in sub-paragraph (1) are -
(a) that the provision of that information would involve
disproportionate effort, or

(b) that the recording of the information contained in the data
by, or the disclosure of the data by, the data controller is
necessary for compliance with any legal obligation to which the
data controller is subject, other than an obligation imposed by
contract.

9. It appears to the Commissioner that two processing conditions from
Schedule 2 to the DPA are potentially relevant in cases such as this:

1. The data subject has given his consent to the processing.

6.—(1) The processing is necessary for the purposes of legitimate
interests pursued by the data controller or by the third party or
parties to whom the data are disclosed, except where the
processing is unwarranted in any particular case by reason of
prejudice to the rights and freedoms or legitimate interests of the
data subject.

10. Article 2(h) of the Directive provided that:

'the data subject's consent’ shall mean any freely given specific
and informed indication of his wishes by which the data subject
signifies his agreement to personal data relating to him being
processed.

11. Section 55A of the DPA empowers the Commissioner to issue monetary

penalties. The relevant provisions are as follows:

(1) The Commissioner may serve a data controller with a a

monetary penalty notice of the Commissioner considers that-

(a) there has been a serious contravention of section 4(4) of the
DPA by the data controller,

(b) the contravention was of a kind likely to cause substantial
damage or substantial distress, and

(c) subsection (2) or (3) applies.

4
Les

13.

14.

1cO.

Information Commissioner's Office

(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.

(3) This subsection applies if the data controller -

(a) knew or ought to have Known -
(i) that there was a risk that the contravention would
occur, and
(ii) that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to
cause substantial damage or substantial distress, but
(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the
contravention.

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website.

The Data Protection (Monetary Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and
Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe that the amount of any penalty
determined by the Commissioner must not exceed £500,000.

Background to the case

Bounty has traded since 1959, and describes itself as a pregnancy and
parenting support club which provides information and markets offers
and services to parents at different stages of a family’s life from pre-
conception to pre-school. Bounty’s key service is the provision of
‘Bounty Packs’ (sample packs for different stages of pregnancy and
after birth), distributed to new parents. Bounty also provides a mobile
App which allows expectant mothers to track their pregnancies, a new-
born portrait service and access to competitions and offers throughout
pregnancy and beyond. In addition to its primary function described
above, Bounty operates a data broking service, providing hosted
marketing on behalf of third parties and, until 30 April 2018, it supplied

data to third parties for the purpose of electronic direct marketing.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

oe
1C O.
Information Commissioner's Office
Bounty first came to the attention of the Commissioner during the
course of a general investigation into non-compliant practices of the
data brokerage industry, in which Bounty were identified as a

significant supplier of personal data to third parties for direct

marketing purposes.

Accordingly the Commissioner launched an investigation into Bounty’s
own practices, in which Bounty advised that it collected personal data
for the purpose of membership registration across a variety of
channels: its website, mobile App, ‘Mother-to-be pack’ offline claim
cards and directly from new mothers at hospital bedsides. yy

Bounty informed the Commissioner that each unique record comprised
the following personal data: Full name, parents date of birth, Email
address, postal address, postcode, pregnancy status, first time mum,
name, gender and date of birth of children (and by extension, address
of child). The mobile App also collected location data Ii

In accordance with its retention policy at the relevant time, digital
records were held ‘indefinitely’ unless a data subject made a written
request for their details to be removed from the database. Children’s

data was retained for the duration of the parent’s membership.

Bounty informed the Commissioner that during the period 1 June 2017
to 30 April 2018, based upon consent received during the member
registration process, it shared a total of 35,027,373 personal data

records with Acxiom (a marketing and profiling agency), Equifax (a
20.

21.

22.

23:

=)
ICO.
Informatlon Commissioner's Office
credit reference agency), Indicia (a marketing agency) and Sky (a
telecommunications company) for the purposes of direct electronic
marketing. These organisations represented the four largest recipients
out of a total of 39 organisations with which Bounty confirmed it
shared personal data, with each record shared representing the
personal data of an individual person. Whilst the data shared with each
organisation varied slightly, in each case it comprised the majority, if

not all of the data collected in respect of each individual.

In representations made to the Commissioner in response to the Notice
of Intent, Bounty went on to confirm that during the period 1 June
2017 to 9 January 2018, the number of individual records shared was
34,267,889 (this is of particular relevance to paragraphs 25 and 39
below).

At the time of disclosure Bounty held over 17 million unique
individual’s records on its database. Bounty stated that it did not share
all records held, but informed the Commissioner that the number of
records shared in the circumstances described in paragraphs 19 & 20
above, represented the data of 14,315,438 unique individuals. Bounty
also confirmed that each data record could be shared on multiple

occasions, in some cases up to 17 times in a 12 month period.

In response to the Commissioner’s enquiries Bounty provided an
explanation of its data collection processes, as well as providing copies
of its Privacy, Data Protection and Retention policies in place at the

point of registration.

Bounty’s Data Protection Policy states that data is not collected
excessively, and only for the specific purposes as explained to the
individual. It states that Bounty may share data with ‘selected third

parties’.
24.

25.

26.

27.

®
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Bounty’s Privacy Policy appearing on its website (dated 2017) states
that Bounty collected personal data for the purposes of ‘marketing’ and
‘tailoring the service’. In relation to data collected about children
specifically, Bounty advised the Commissioner that it used the
knowledge of due dates and children’s birth dates to offer ‘tailored
communications’. The policy goes on to say that users may receive
communications from Bounty or ‘a third party’, and that information
may be sent based on a user’s location. The policy then categorises
general types of ‘selected third parties’, together with a link to specific
companies, who may send marketing iii
ee «(Up to 9 January 2018 (see below) none of the
organisations with whom data was shared (as per paragraph 19 above)

were named in the Policy.

In representations made to the Commissioner on 8 March 2019,
Bounty explained that in late 2017, a decision was made to
supplement the terms of its Privacy Policy by supplying a ‘named list’
of third-party partners. The list, which included the four named parties
detailed in paragraph 19 of this Notice, went live on the website and

the mobile App on 9 January 2018.

Individuals using Bounty’s App are offered an opt-in to marketing with
a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response option to the question "would you like to
receive free samples, offers and promotions by post and email from
carefully selected third parties (see privacy policy for full details)”.
The website operates using a similar notice, offering a tick box for
users to opt-in to receiving promotions by post and email from

“carefully selected third parties”.

Bounty advised the Commissioner during her investigation that the

business is moving towards a digital only data capture platform, but
28.

29.

Q
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
provided examples of hard copy claim cards still in use at the relevant
time, and a copy card left at hospitals for new mothers who do not see
a Bounty representative during their stay. Whilst hard copy claim cards

are not currently in use, the data previously collected in this manner

continues to be held by Bounty.

None of the claim cards have an opt-in to marketing option, instead, a
small piece of text at the bottom of the card explains: "By providing
your email address and/or telephone number (optional) you consent to
be contacted by these channels as well as post. We will take great care
of the information you have provided and will use it to fulfil your
membership of Bounty. While you are a member, we may share your
information with a selected group of companies who also have
services, free samples, offers and product information that may be of
interest to you.” Name and postal address are mandatory data fields
on each claim card, so individuals wishing to register for Bounty’s
services ‘offline’ had no choice but to agree to their personal data
being shared with third parties for marketing purposes. Given that
‘offline’ registrants did not have access to Bounty’s Privacy Policy at
the point of registration, the supplementary list referred to in
paragraph 25 of this Notice likewise would not have been available to
individuals registering ‘offline’ via hard copy claim cards or bedside

contracts.
30.

ail

32.

oo

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
Bounty informed the Commissioner that in respect of its current
database, 69% of the records held represent data acquired through

‘offline’ registrations, and therefore it follows that 31% of records

represent data acquired through ‘online’ registrations.

In further representations to the Commissioner dated 8 March 2019,
Bounty stated that in relation to its current records data base, 66% of
‘offline’ registrants provided an email address as part of the
registration process. As a matter of course, Bounty states it sent an
email to those registrants shortly after registration, which included in
the footer a direct link to its Privacy Policy and an ‘unsubscribe’ link,
and so ‘offline’ registrants would have been given the opportunity to
view Bounty’s Privacy Policy ‘within a very short period of registration’.
The Commissioners position is that fair processing information should
be provided at the point of data collection and not within a ‘very short
period’ thereafter, and so finds that Bounty’s practice as described

above did not comply with DPP1.

On 30 April 2018 Bounty ceased its practice of sharing data with third
parties for direct marketing purposes, and removed from the ‘named
list’ referred to in paragraph 25 of this Notice the four organisations

named in paragraph 19.

Up to the relevant time (i.e. up to 30 April 2018 in respect of ‘offline’
registrations and 9 January 2018 in respect of ‘online’ registrations),
Bounty’s fair processing notices gave no indication that personal data
may be shared with any of the organisations detailed in paragraph 19
of this notice. Based upon the information Bounty provided, it is the
Commissioner’s considered view that any ‘consent’ provided by data
subjects was not informed, nor could data subjects have foreseen that

their data would be shared with those organisations.

10
34.

35.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the balance

of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of the DPA by Bounty and, if so, whether the conditions
of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

The contravention

36,

37.

As set out above, the “fairness” requirement under DPP1 included a
transparency duty: data controllers were required to provide or make
available to data subjects information about (inter alia) the purposes
for which their personal data will be used. Bounty failed to comply with
that transparency duty in this case. It did not provide or make
available to the affected data subjects information about the potential
disclosure of their personal data to Acxiom, Equifax, Indicia or Sky.

The “fairness” requirement under DPP1 also included a substantive
duty to treat individuals fairly when using their personal data. In
particular, fairness involves adhering to individual’s reasonable
expectations of how their data will be used and not using their data in
ways that risk causing them damage or distress, unless there is some
sufficiently weighty justification for doing so. Bounty failed to use the
personal data of the affected data subjects fairly in this case. As
indicated above, data subjects registering with a pregnancy and
parenting club would not reasonably have expected their personal data
to be disclosed to the likes of credit reference, marketing and profiling
agencies. Bounty had no adequate justification for acting as it did. Its
actions appear to have been motivated by financial gain, given that
data sharing was an integral part of Bounty’s business model, and as
confirmed by Bounty, cessation of its data sharing practice on 30 April
2018 resulted in significant commercial impact.

1]
38.

39.

40.

41.

o
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office

The extracts from Bounty’s fair processing information set out above

Suggest that Bounty sought to justify its disclosure of data to third

parties for marketing purposes by reference to condition 1 of Schedule

2, namely the consent of data subjects. Indeed, Bounty confirmed to

the Commissioner during her investigation that the sharing of the

personal data as described in this notice was based on consent

received from data subjects during the registration process. The

Commissioner’s assessment is that this condition was not met here.

These ‘consents’ were not specific or informed, given that data

subjects were not told that that their data may be shared for the

purposes of marketing with Acxiom, Equifax, Indicia or Sky, or with

any organisations of a similar nature. Nor, in the case of ‘offline’ claim

cards, were these ‘consents’ freely given, given that, at the point of

registration, the data subjects had no choice but to agree to disclosure

of their personal data for marketing purposes.

The only other potentially applicable condition from Schedule 2 in such
cases is condition 6(1) (legitimate interest). Bounty has not indicated
to the Commissioner that it relies upon this condition, however the
Commissioner’s assessment is that this condition would not have been
met here either. Given its failure to inform data subjects that their
personal data may be shared with the organisations listed in paragraph
19 or indeed any organisations of a similar nature, the balance of

interests entailed by condition 6(1) tipped against Bounty.

The Commissioner’s assessment is thus that no condition from

Schedule 2 to the DPA was satisfied in this case.

For those reasons, the Commissioner’s assessment is that Bounty’s
disclosure of the personal data contained in approximately 34,436,776

records comprising:
42.

(1)

(2)

(3)

a)

b)

g

1C QO.

Information Commissioner’s Office
24,168,887 records provided to Acxiom, Equifax, Indicia and
Sky between 1 June 2017 and 30 April 2018 in respect of data
acquired through ‘offline’ member registrations (representing

69% of 35,027,373 records shared during this period - see
paragraphs 19 & 30 above), and

10,267,889 records provided to Acxiom, Equifax, Indicia and
Sky between 1 June 2017 and 9 January 2018 in respect of data
acquired though ‘online’ member registrations (representing
31% of 34,267,889 records shared during this period - see
paragraphs 20 & 30 above)

contravened DPP1 in that:

The disclosure was unfair, in that the data subjects were not
provided with information about the potential disclosure of their
personal data to those organisations, or to any organisations of
a similar nature who may use that data for the purposes of

marketing.

The disclosure was also unfair in that it contravened the
reasonable expectations of the data subjects and exposed at
least some of them to potential distress without reasonable

justification.

Neither the consent condition, nor the legitimate interests
condition, nor any other condition from Schedule 2 to the DPA

was met.

In respect of ‘online’ member registrations this was an ongoing

contravention until 9 January 2018 when Bounty supplemented its

Privacy Policy with a ‘named list’ of third-party partners, which

13
=)

1C O o

Information Commissioner's Office
included those organisations detailed in paragraph 19 of this Notice. In
respect of ‘offline’ member registrations this was an ongoing

contravention until 30 April 2018 when Bounty ceased its practice of

trading and sharing personal data with third parties.

43. The Commissioner is satisfied that Bounty was responsible for this

contravention.

44. The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the

conditions under section 55A DPA were met.

The issuing of a monetary penalty

45. The Commissioner’s preliminary view is that the conditions for issuing

a monetary penalty under section 55A have been met in this case.
Seriousness of the contravention

46. The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious, in that:

(1) The number of affected data subjects was extraordinarily high -
in excess of 34 million records having been disclosed, comprising
the personal data of over 14 million individuals. This represents
an unprecedented number of affected data subjects in the history
of the Commissioner’s investigations into data broking
organisations. As her investigation focussed on only four 4 out of
39 organisations with which Bounty shared data, it is reasonable
to suppose that the number of records disclosed could have been

significantly higher.

14
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

wo
1CO.
Information Commissioner’s Office
In addition, some of the affected individual’s data was shared on
multiple occasions and with multiple organisations, further
impacting on their data rights. Whilst Bounty stated it tracked the
data it shared, trading data up to 17 times in a 12 month period

is arguably disproportionate, and opened the affected individuals

to excessive processing that they did not consent to.

The sustained and prolonged duration of the contravention —
approximately 7 months in respect of ‘online’ member
registrations, and 11 months in respect of ‘offline’ member

registrations.

The data subjects were not only potentially vulnerable new
mothers/mothers-to-be, but also very young children.
Furthermore, whilst Bounty advised that its ‘philosophy and
policy’ is never to market children, and it did not share children’s
names with third parties, the Commissioner considers that
sharing the birth date and gender of a child along with
information about its parent, creates the potential this data to be
appended to create a fuller profile of the child, which may then
be used for future targeted marketing. In these circumstances a
loss of control of data has already taken place before the child
has capacity to consent for its data to be used for marketing

purposes.

In the Commissioner’s assessment, this disclosure went clearly
against the terms of the privacy notices in place at the time. As
subjects signed up to a parenting club it is considered highly
unlikely that individuals would reasonably expect their personal
data to be shared with credit referencing, marketing and profiling

agencies, unless explicitly informed that it would be.

15
(6)

(7)

@
1CcQ.
Information Commissioner's Office

The nature of the data involved - this included information

relating to number, age and gender of children, and iii

ee

pregnancy status. Disclosure of such information in this context

created a real risk of distress (see further below).

Individuals were exposed to a significant loss of control over their
data, exacerbated by the fact that Bounty did not inform them

about this disclosure either before or after it had taken place.

47. The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Contraventions of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or
substantial distress

48. The Commissioner considers that this contravention was of a kind

likely to cause substantial damage or substantial distress, in that:

(1)

For those data subjects registering online, Bounty’s privacy
notices contained reasonably clear descriptions of the kinds of
third parties who might receive personal data from Bounty.
However, none of the four most supplied organisations were
listed, and the broad category types did not clearly indicate the
types of organisations with which the data the subject of the
Notice was shared. At least some of the affected data subjects
are likely to have been distressed by this failure to adhere to
their expectations about how their data would have been used.
At least some of these data subjects would reasonably feel

misled.

16
(2)

(3)

(4)

(S)

(6)

a
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
In addition, given that Bounty failed to be transparent with the
data subjects about this disclosure, the data subjects may well
have been distressed by uncertainty as to how the organisations

in this case obtained information with which to target them based

on their personal circumstances.

This sense of distress is likely to have been exacerbated by the
fact that it focussed on the affected data subjects’ status as new
or expectant mothers, as well as on their young children. It is
highly likely that at least some data subjects who may not be
concerned about their name or email address being shared with a
marketing company, would have been distressed by the inclusion
of information about their pregnancy status and children without

their explicit consent.

At least some of the affected data subjects are likely to be
distressed by the perceived loss of control over their data when it
was shared without their knowledge with large marketing

organisations.

At least some of the affected data subjects are likely to be
distressed by the fact that their personal data has been shared
on numerous occasions with multiple organisations. Some data
records were shared up to 17 times over a 12 month period.
This, in the Commissioner’s view, would exacerbate the level of

any distress caused.

The Commissioner has also given weight to the number of
affected data subjects: in excess of 14 million. The Commissioner
considers that even if the damage or distress likely to have been

suffered by each affected individual was less than substantial,

Li
49.

50.

(7)

Information Commissioner's Office

the cumulative impact would clearly pass the threshold of

“substantial”.

In representations made to the Commissioner, Bounty pointed to
a lack of complaints about Bounty’s processing of data in the
circumstances described. Bounty also stated that only a tiny
proportion of those registering ‘online’ went on to view the
supplementary list linked to the Privacy Policy, suggesting that
very few data subjects were concerned about the ‘named list’ and
so (if any) detriment to those individuals would be minimal.
Bounty relies upon a lack of any evidence of actual distress,
stating this case is based more upon an assumption of ‘risk’. The
Commissioner’s view is that the above is demonstrative of the
‘invisible’ nature of the processing whereby individuals are
Unaware, either before or after, of the processing of their data in
these circumstances. She considers that if individuals were aware
of the processing of their personal data in these circumstances
there would be a real likelihood of substantial damage or distress

of the nature described above.

Given the considerations outlined above and the number of affected

data subjects, it is likely that the “substantial distress” threshold was

crossed here. In other words, the Commissioner’s view is that

there was a significant and weighty chance that a contravention

of the kind described would have such consequences.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section

55A (1) DPA is met.

18
ol.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

While it may not have set out to contravene the DPA, Bounty’s actions

in sharing the data were plainly deliberate. In any event, the

Commissioner considers that Bounty knew or ought reasonably to have

known that there was a risk that the contravention would (a) occur,

and (b) be of a kind likely to cause substantial damage or substantial

distress. She further considers that Bounty failed to take reasonable

steps to prevent such a contravention in that:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Bounty was aware of the terms of its own privacy notices. It
should have been readily aware that those terms were

inadequate for disclosure for these purposes.

Bounty knew its customer base. It knew why they registered
with Bounty and what kind of marketing communications they
would expect to receive. It should have been very clear to

Bounty that this disclosure contravened those expectations.

Given its own knowledge of its customer base and the common
sense considerations summarised at paragraph 48 above, it
should have been readily apparent to Bounty that this disclosure
was likely to cause substantia! distress to at least some of the

affected data subjects.

The ICO has published extensive guidance on the importance of
valid consent and how to obtain it, and a long established
organisation of Bounty’s size should have been well! aware of the
steps it needed to take to ensure its data subjects had all the

relevant information at the point of data collection.

19
Zi.

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

 

(S)

 

 

(6) At the commencement of the Commissioner’s investigation in
early 2018, Bounty informed the Commissioner that it planned
detailed changes to ensure that its marketing practices were
compliant with the (then) forthcoming GDPR, including cessation
of trading and sharing personal data with third party
organisations, updating fair processing notices to ensure data
obtained for marketing is fully opted-in, changes to its retention
policy, cessation of hard copy claim cards, training of staff and
purging its database to reduce the number of records held.
Bounty knew that its data sharing practices would likely not be
compliant with GDPR and confirmed that it had not carried out
impact assessments prior to GDPR. If these appropriate checks
had been carried out beforehand then Bounty should have

known that its data sharing practices would contravene the DPA.

(7) As referred to above, the steps it took to prevent further
breaches and minimise detriment to data subjects shows that
Bounty was alive to the kinds of steps that would be needed to
avoid contraventions of the DPA in the circumstances, but it
failed to take any such steps. The Commissioner considers there

was no good reason for this failure.

The Commissioner’s view is therefore that condition (c) from section
55A (1) DPA is met. That view is based on the size and scale of the
contravention, given the number of affected data subjects, the likely

consequences of such a contravention and Bounty’s culpability for it.
53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner’s decision to impose a moneta enalt

 

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that
the conditions from section 55A(1) DPA have been met in this case.
She is also satisfied that section 55A(3) and the procedural rights

under section 55B have been complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent dated 21
January 2019 in which the Commissioner set out her preliminary
thinking. Bounty received the Notice of Intent on 22 January 2019.

The Commissioner received initial representations from Bounty on 19
February 2019, together with additional representations and
information on 8 March 2019 which she has taken into consideration
when reaching her decision. She has also considered Bounty’s financial
position, as evidenced by its published annual accounts, more recent
unaudited accounts and bank statements.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty
in this case.

The Commissioner has taken into account the following mitigating
features of this case:

e Bounty voluntarily ceased its practice of trading and sharing
personal date with third party organisations on 30 April 2018.

e Bounty has since made significant changes to its data practices to

ensure compliance with GDPR and PECR (as detailed in paragraph
51(6) above).

21
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with the DPA and this is an
opportunity to reinforce the need for data controllers to ensure that
appropriate and effective security measures are applied to personal
data.

The amount of the monetary penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that the amount of the penalty is £400,000 (four hundred

thousand pounds).
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 16 May 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
15 May 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £320,000 (three hundred and twenty thousand pounds).
However, you should be aware that the early payment discount is not

available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

22
63.

64.

65.

66.

Information Commissioner's Office

a) the imposition of the monetary penalty

and/or;

b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

the period specified within the notice within which a monetary penalty
must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary penalty has

not been paid;

all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any
variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and
the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

ao
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Dated the 9th day of April 2019

  
 

Signe UW...

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 SAF

24
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1, Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
‘Tribunal’) against the notice.

2, If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3 You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule,

4. The notice of appeal should state: -

ao
a)

b)
Cc)
d)
e)
f)

g)

h)

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office
your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
the name and address of the Information Commissioner;
details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of, and
Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure
(First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009
(Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

26