The aim and purpose of the right to information guaranteed by Article 20 (4) of the B-VG is to enable citizens to access information that is only available to the public administration. in particular, if access to the coveted information is instrumental in exercising the right to freedom of expression, in particular freedom to receive and communicate news or ideas. The restrictions on the obligation to provide information must be interpreted strictly if a request for information is to be regarded as a relevant preparatory step for journalistic or other activities designed to create a forum for public debate, if the requested information is in the public interest and has a role for the respondent "watchdog" within the meaning of the case law of the ECtHR (see the considerations of the VwGH in the E of 29.05.2018, Ra 2017/03/0083). 9. Conversely, in the context of the obligation to provide information, it is not the task of an authority to obtain information that it does not have itself or to accept professionally or privately-qualified practitioners, such as lawyers, trainee lawyers or other practicing lawyers Conduct judicial research and then inform the requestors of the result. 10. Information within the meaning of the information obligation laws of the federation and the countries always have knowledge declarations to the object, whereby their contents are only such information, which are already known at the time of the request of the administration and not procured by the requested administrative unit for the purpose of fulfilling the obligation to provide information Need to become. Provision of information means passing on information about a file content which, as a rule, will not show the level of detail of information that would be obtained by accessing the file. The use of the term "information" implies that the administration is not obliged to conduct extensive elaboration, to provide expert opinions or to obtain information that is otherwise accessible. The law provides that the submission of information can be subordinated to the other tasks of the administration, which means that requests for information must contain specific questions that can be answered in the short term without affecting the other administrative procedures (VwGH, E 27.11.2018, Ra 2017 / 02/0141, RS 2 with reference to annulment 41 BlgNR 17. GP, 3, VwGH of 9 September 2015, 2013/04/0021, see also about VwGH of 26 November 2008, 2007/06/0084, VwGH vom July 23, 2013, 2010/05/0230). B2 Legal conclusions 11. The questions posed by the applicant do not fall within the regulatory scope of the DPA. The Authority is confronted with pertinent legal issues only as part of its procedural role as an official party in administrative court proceedings. In this respect, the data protection authority and the applicant, who are both parties to an appeal procedure concerning a finding of the Federal Administrative Court, are faced with access to the requested information at the same level. 12. The first question of the applicant was not to be answered, since it is already on the basis of the wording of the question ("What is the legal situation?") To a request for the preparation of a legal opinion, the fulfillment of which according to ยง 1 Abs 1987 no claim exists. 13. Both questions of the applicant in common is the question of possible jurisdiction. The complainant has already been informed of the second question in Mag. Suda's reply, from its own knowledge, that the relevant question has not been decided and at least one relevant procedure is pending before the Verwaltungsgerichtshof. 14. Whether there is any further relevant case law, such as those of the Federal Administrative Court, the DPA can not state with certainty the file situation and the knowledge available to the authority. However, on the basis of his training, the applicant would have to be able to obtain this information himself from other sources, such as research in the Federal Public Information System (RIS) set up specifically for such purposes, in which all decisions which are not merely procedural in accordance with ยง 20 BVwGG Federal Administrative Court to procure. 15. The request for information was therefore dismissed in accordance with the rules.
