Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER
MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

24 OCTOBER 2018

To: Facebook Ireland Ltd

4 Grand Canal Square
Grand Canal Harbour
Dublin 2

Ireland

Facebook Inc
1610 Willow Road
Menlo Park, CA 94025

The above companies are collectively referred to in this Notice as “the

Facebook Companies”.

Introduction

Lis The Information Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) has decided to
issue the Facebook Companies with a monetary penalty under section
55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“the DPA”). The basis on which

section 55A continues to apply for the purposes of this Notice

l
®
1CcO.
Information Commissioner's Office
(notwithstanding the repeal of the DPA) is set out at paragraph 12 below.
The Commissioner has previously served a Notice of Intent (“NOI”) in
relation to this monetary penalty, on 19 June 2018. The Facebook
Companies served the Commissioner with written representations in
response, on 18 August 2018. The Commissioner has taken account of

those representations when reaching her decision to issue this monetary

penalty.

The amount of the monetary penalty which the Commissioner has
decided to issue is £500,000.

As explained below, the Facebook Companies are joint data controllers
in respect of the data processing to which this Notice relates, and hence
the Commissioner considers that they are jointly and severally liable for

the amount of the monetary penalty.

The monetary penalty arises out of a very serious data incident taking
place before 25 May 2018 and affecting users whose personal data is
processed on the Facebook Platform. The total number of users
worldwide who were affected by the incident has been estimated by the
Facebook Companies themselves as being up to 87 million. Details of

the incident are set out below.

The Commissioner considers that the Facebook Companies are and were
at all material times joint data controllers of the personal data of (at
least) the following individuals: data subjects who are resident outside
of the USA and Canada, and whose personal data is processed by or in
relation to the operation of the Facebook Platform. This is on the basis
that the Facebook Companies together do and did at all material times
make decisions about how to operate the Facebook Platform in respect
of the personal data of those data subjects. In other words, the
Facebook Companies do and did at all material times jointly determine

2
Information Commissioner's Office

the purposes for which and the manner in which such personal data are

and were processed.

The Commissioner considers that in some circumstances the Facebook
Companies processed personal data in the context of a UK
establishment. They did so where the personal data of any data subjects
was processed in the context of the operations of Facebook UK Limited
(“Facebook UK”), company number 06331310, of 10 Brock Street,
Regents Place, London NW1 3FG. The Commissioner’s conclusion is
based on the decision and reasoning of the CJEU in Google Spain v AEPD
[2014] QB 1022, and the Court of Appeal of Northern Ireland in CG v
Facebook Limited and McCloskey [2016] NICA 54.

Furthermore, the Commissioner is aware that between November 2013
and December 2015, Facebook UK provided certain support services to
Facebook Ireland Limited in its capacity as the service provider and data
controller for users of the Facebook service in the EU, including for users
in the UK. The services which Facebook UK provided included marketing
and advertising support in relation to certain larger advertisers who

wished to advertise on the Facebook Platform.

The Commissioner considers that, on the above bases, the Facebook
Companies processed personal data in the context of a UK
establishment, in respect of any individuals who made use of the
Facebook site from the UK at any time that is material for the purpose
of this Notice (this category of individuals is referred to in this Notice as
“UK Users”). UK Users would include (but would not be confined to) UK
residents who made use of the Facebook site during the material time.
UK Users would also include persons visiting the UK who made use of
the Facebook site during the material time while visiting the UK. Because
the processing by the Facebook Companies of personal data about UK

Users took place in the context of a UK establishment: (i) such

3
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

processing fell within the scope of the DPA; and (ii) the Commissioner
has jurisdiction over the Facebook Companies in respect of such

processing.

For the reasons set out below, the Commissioner considers that:

(1) The Facebook Companies unfairly processed personal data, in
breach of the first data protection principle (“DPP1”) set out in
Schedule 1 to the DPA; and

(2) The Facebook Companies failed to take appropriate technical and
organisational measures against unauthorised or unlawful
processing of personal data, in breach of the seventh data
protection principle (“DPP7”) set out in Schedule 1 to the DPA.

The Facebook Companies breached DPP1 and DPP7 in this way, in
respect of the processing of personal data that took place in the context
of an establishment in the United Kingdom, on the basis explained
above. The Facebook Companies thereby acted in breach of section 4(4)
of the DPA, which at all material times required data controllers to
comply with the data protection principles in relation to all personal data

in respect of which they were the data controller.

The Commissioner’s view is that, in all the circumstances, each of these
failures constituted a serious contravention by each of the Facebook
companies of DPP1 and DPP7. The Commissioner further considers that
the conditions for issuing a monetary penalty are satisfied and that it is
appropriate to issue such a penalty in this case. Moreover, the
Commissioner considers that the amount of £ 500,000 is not excessive:

indeed, but for the statutory limitation on the amount of the monetary
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

penalty, it would have been reasonable and proportionate to impose a

higher penalty.

11. This Notice is served under section 55A of the DPA. It explains the
grounds on which the Commissioner has decided to issue the monetary

penalty.

12. The DPA was repealed with effect from 25 May 2018 by the Data
Protection Act 2018. However, sections 55A, 55B, 55D and 55E of the
DPA continue to apply for the purposes of the present case, since the
Commissioner considers it appropriate to serve this Monetary Penalty
Notice in respect of contraventions of section 4(4) of the DPA taking
place before 25 May 2018: see Data Protection Act 2018, Schedule 20,
Part 7, paragraph 38(1)(c).

Legal framework

13. The DPA implemented European legislation (Directive 95/46/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to the protection
of personal data. The DPA must be applied so as to give effect to that

Directive.

14. The Facebook Companies are joint data controllers of persona! data, as
explained above. Section 4(4) of the DPA provides that, subject to
section 27(1) of the DPA, it is the duty of a data controller to comply
with the data protection principles in relation to all personal data in

respect of which he is the data controller.

15. Schedule 1 of the DPA contains the eight data protection principles. For
the purposes of this Notice, DPP1 and DPP7 are relevant.

5
Information Commissioner's Office

16. DPP1 stipulates as follows:

Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully and, in
particular, shall not be processed unless -

(a) at least one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and
(b) in the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the
conditions in Schedule 3 is also met.

17. DPP7 stipulates as follows:

Appropriate technical and organisational measures shall be taken
against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal
data.

18. As regards DPP7, the interpretative provisions in Part II of Schedule 1 to
the DPA provide that:

9. Having regard to the state of technological development and the
cost of implementing any measures, the measures must ensure a
level of security appropriate to—

(a) the harm that might result from such unauthorised or unlawful
processing or accidental loss, destruction or damage as are
mentioned in the seventh principle, and

(b) the nature of the data to be protected.

10. The data controller must take reasonable steps to ensure the
reliability of any employees of his who have access to the personal
data.

11. Where processing of personal data is carried out by a data
processor on behalf of a data controller, the data controller must
in order to comply with the seventh principle—

(a) choose a data processor providing sufficient guarantees in
respect of the technical and organisational security measures
governing the processing to be carried out, and

(b) take reasonable steps to ensure compliance with those
measures.
19:

20.

Zl.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
12. Where processing of personal data is carried out by a data
processor on behalf of a data controller, the data controller is not
to be regarded as complying with the seventh principle unless—
(a) the processing is carried out under a contract—
(i) which is made or evidenced in writing, and
(ii) under which the data processor is to act only on instructions
from the data controller, and
(b) the contract requires the data processor to comply with
obligations equivalent to those imposed on a data controller by the
seventh principle.

Section 55A of the DPA empowers the Commissioner to issue monetary

penalties. The relevant provisions are as follows:

(1) The Commissioner may serve a data controller with a monetary
penalty notice if the Commissioner is satisfied that—

(a) there has been a serious contravention of section 4(4) by the
data controller,

(b) the contravention was of a kind likely to cause substantial
damage or substantial distress, and

(c) subsection (2) or (3) applies.

(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.

(3) This subsection applies if the data controller—

(a) knew or ought to have known —

(i) that there was a risk that the contravention would occur, and
(ii) that such a contravention would be of a kind likely to cause
substantial damage or substantial distress, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention.

The Data Protection (Monetary Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and
Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe that the amount of any penalty

determined by the Commissioner must not exceed £500,000.

The Commissioner has issued and published statutory guidance under

section 55C (1) of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties.
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner's investigation

22. The Commissioner has conducted an investigation into the use of data
analytics for political purposes. The Commissioner’s investigation Is
aimed at assessing the data processing practices of, amongst others,
political parties and campaigns, data companies, and social media
platforms. The investigation extends to the data processing practices of
companies operating internationally, when processing data in the

context of an establishment in the United Kingdom.

23. The Facebook Platform is a social media platform that has been used by
political parties and campaigns. The Facebook Platform, and the
processing of personal data by the Facebook companies in connection
with the operation of that Platform, has therefore been brought within

the scope of the Commissioner’s investigation.

24. An initial letter was sent to the Facebook Companies on 23 August 2017,
and the Commissioner has carried out extensive further investigations
thereafter in respect of those companies. The matters set out in this
Notice are based on the evidence obtained by the Commissioner in the

course of that investigation.

Factual circumstances relevant to the contravention

 

25. The Facebook Companies, throughout the period of time that is relevant
to this Notice, have permitted third parties to operate applications, or
“apps”, in conjunction with the Facebook Platform. Further, the
Facebook Companies, throughout the period of time that is relevant to

this Notice, have permitted such third parties to obtain personal data
26.

bd

28.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

about those users of the Facebook Platform who install the third party’s
app. Since the launch of Facebook’s Platform in May 2007, the Facebook
Companies have also permitted such third parties to obtain personal data
about users of the Facebook Platform who do not themselves install the

third party’s app, but whose Facebook friends install that app.

In 2013, an individual named Dr. Aleksandr Kogan created an app that
subsequently became known as “thisisyourdigitallife” (“the App”) for use
in conjunction with the Facebook Platform. Dr. Kogan acted both in his
own capacity and by means of his company, Global Science Research
Limited (“GSR”). The Facebook Companies permitted Dr. Kogan and/or
GSR to operate the App in conjunction with the Facebook Platform, with
effect from November 2013. The App was therefore operating on
Facebook’s Graph API v.1.0 at this time.

As a result, Dr. Kogan and/or GSR were able to obtain personal data
both from individuals who opted to use the App, and from Facebook

friends of those users.

The App utilized Facebook Login in order to request permission from
users of the App to access certain data from their Facebook accounts.
The App was designed to and was able to obtain the following categories

of information from individuals who opted to use the App:

e Their public Facebook profile, including their name and gender.

e Birthdate.

e “Current city”, if the user had chosen to add this information to their
profile.

e Photographs in which the users were tagged.

e Pages that the users had liked.

e Posts on the users’ timeline.

e News feed posts.
29.

30.

Sls

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

e Friends lists
e Email addresses

e Facebook messages

In relation to Facebook messages, the Commissioner is aware of
evidence to suggest that the data obtained was not confined simply to
the parties who exchanged messages, but also included the content of

those messages.

By means of the information obtained from users of the App, the App

generated personality profiles for those users.

To the extent that the App had access to the identity of those who had
exchanged Facebook messages with a user of the App, or to the content
of such messages, the individuals who had exchanged such messages
with users of the App: were not informed that the App was being given
access to such information; and were not asked to consent to such

access.

The App also requested permission from users of the App to access some

or all of the following categories of data about their Facebook friends:

e Public profile data, including name and gender.

e Birthdate.

e “Current city”, if the friends had chosen to add this information to
their profile.

e Photographs in which the friends were tagged.

e Pages that the friends had liked.

The App was therefore designed to and was able to obtain an extensive

range of data about the Facebook friends of the App’s users.
32:

33.

34.

Bo.

36.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Where the App collected data about the Facebook friends of the App’s
users, those friends were not informed that the App was being given

access to that data, and were not asked to consent to such access.

In April 2014, the Facebook Companies introduced changes to the
Facebook Platform, by deployment of V2 of the Graph API Platform,
which reduced the ability of apps to access information both about their
users and about the Facebook friends of their users. For pre-existing
apps, there was a one year grace period (until May 2015) before they
were subject to these new limitations, and so they were able to continue
to collect the data of users’ friends as before for up to a year following

the changes.

Dr Kogan requested to migrate the App to V2 of the Graph API Platform
prior to the end of the grace period. The App was subject to review on 6
May 2014 and Facebook rejected Dr Kogan’s request for extended

permissions the following day.

After May 2014, the App continued to have access to V1 of the Graph
API Platform, and therefore retained access to detailed information about
the users and the friends of its users. When the limitations took effect
in May 2015, following the one year grace period, the App ceased to
have access to detailed information about the friends of its users, and
had access to a more limited set of information about its users. However,
application developers including Dr Kogan and GSR were able to retain
detailed information about users of their apps and their friends that they
had previously collected via their apps. The Facebook Companies did

not at that point require them to delete such data, or any of it.

The App remained in operation on the Facebook Platform until December
2015.
Ss

38.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The App was used by some 300,000 Facebook users worldwide. Because
the App was able to collect data about the Facebook friends of its users,
the total number of individuals about whom the App collected personal
data has been estimated by the Facebook Companies as being up to 87
million worldwide. The number of UK Facebook users who used the App
has been stated by the Facebook Companies to be 1,040 (though the
Facebook Companies have also stated that 1,765 individuals in Great
Britain used the App). The total number of UK Facebook users about
whom the App collected personal data has been estimated by the

Facebook Companies as being at least 1 million.

Dr. Kogan and/or GSR shared such personal data (both about users of
the App, and about their Facebook friends), and/or data derived from

such data, with the following companies:

e Toronto Laboratory for Social Neuroscience, University of Toronto

e Euonia Technologies, Inc: this is a marketing company based in
Delaware, and may have been associated with SCL Elections Limited
and Cambridge Analytica

e SCL Elections Limited (which controls Cambridge Analytica)

At least some of the data shared with these companies is likely to have
been used in connection with or for the purposes of political
campaigning. In response to the NOI, Facebook has asserted that the
only individuals whose personal data was used in this way were US
residents. On the basis of the information currently available to the
Commissioner it is not possible to determine whether this assertion Is
correct. However, even if Facebook’s assertion is correct, the

Commissioner notes the following:
39.

40.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

(i) Some US residents would also, from time to time, have been
UK Users (as defined above): e.g. if they used the Facebook
site while visiting the UK.

(ii) By reason of the matters set out above, the personal data of
UK Users who were UK residents was put at serious risk of being
shared and used in connection with or for the purposes of
political campaigning (even if that risk did not eventuate).
Dr.Kogan and/or GSR were put in a position where they were
effectively at liberty (if they so chose) to use the personal data
of UK residents for such purposes, or to share such data with

persons or companies who would use it for such purposes.

The Facebook Companies operated a Platform Policy in relation to the
operation of apps. However, the Facebook Companies took no steps, or
no sufficient steps, to ensure that the App operated consistently with the
Platform Policy. For instance, the Facebook Companies did not review
the terms and conditions governing the relationship between Dr. Kogan
and/or GSR and the users of the App in order to check that such terms
and conditions were consistent with the Platform Policy. Nor did the
Facebook Companies establish any system under which such a review

would have taken place.

The Facebook Companies have admitted that the way in which the App
was operated was in breach of the Platform Policy in at least the following

respects:

e In accordance with section 3.3 of the Platform Policy, data obtained
about friends of users of the App should have been utilised solely to

augment the experience of those users within the App. Instead, in
41.

42.

43.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

breach of section 3.3, such data was used by Dr. Kogan and/or GSR

for their own purposes.

e In breach of section 3.9 of the Platform Policy, Dr. Kogan and/or GSR
sold to third parties personal data that was collected by the App.

e In breach of section 3.10 of the Platform Policy, Dr. Kogan and/or
GSR transferred to third parties personal data that was collected by
the App.

e The App requested permission from users to obtain personal data that
the App itself did not need. This was in breach of section 7.4 of the

Platform Policy.

Further, on 6 May 2014, Dr. Kogan gave an undertaking to the Facebook
Companies (“the Undertaking”) that the App was being used for research
purposes only, and not for commercial purposes. The Facebook
Companies took no steps, or no sufficient steps, to ensure that the App

was being operated consistently with the Undertaking.

In breach of the Undertaking, Dr. Kogan and/or GSR marketed research

on acommercial basis, derived from personal data collected by the App.

The Facebook Companies did not become aware that the App was being
operated in breach of the Platform Policy and the Undertaking, until an
article relating to the App was published in the Guardian Newspaper on
11 December 2015. Only at that point did the Facebook Companies
terminate the App’s access rights to the Facebook Login API, and

commence an investigation into the operation of the App.
1CcO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The contravention

44. By reason of the matters set out above, the Facebook Companies acted
in breach of DPP1 and DPP7.

Breach of DPP1

45. In breach of DPP1, the Facebook companies unfairly processed the
personal data of users of the Facebook site, including: those who were
users of the App; those who exchanged Facebook messages with users

of the App; and those who were Facebook friends with users of the App.

46. The Facebook Companies permitted the App to operate in such a way
that it collected personal data about Facebook friends of users of the
App, without those Facebook friends being informed that such data was
being collected, and without them being asked to consent to such data
collection. The Facebook Companies did not attempt to prevent the App
from collecting data in this manner; for instance, such data collection
was not prohibited by the Platform Policy. By permitting the App to
operate in this way, the Facebook Companies unfairly processed the
personal data of the Facebook friends of users of the App. Further, to
the extent that such processing of personal data was purportedly based
on consent, any such consent was invalid and ineffective, since it was
not freely given, specific, or informed: see the definition of “consent” in
Directive 95/46/EC, Article 2(h).

47. The Facebook Companies have asserted, in the course of the
Commissioner’s investigation, that data about users’ Facebook friends
was only collected by the App if the privacy settings adopted by those
Facebook friends permitted such collection to take place. Even if this is
the case, it is not sufficient to render such processing fair:

15
@
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office
e It is now apparent that, for at least part of the period during which
the App had access to the Facebook Platform, extensive information
about Facebook users could be collected by an app, as a result of
other Facebook users choosing to use that app: see paragraph 31
above. During the period when the App was permitted to access the
Facebook Platform, the Facebook Companies failed to provide
adequate information to Facebook users that this could occur, and as
to the steps that they needed to take to prevent this. Individuals
would not reasonably have expected their personal data to be
collected in this way merely because of a choice made by other

individuals to use a particular app.

e Itwas unfair for the Facebook Companies to rely on a Facebook user’s
privacy settings as enabling apps installed by the user’s Facebook
friends to collect extensive personal data from the user’s account
(including some or all of the categories of data set out at paragraph
31 above). The Facebook Companies ought instead to have ensured
that, before access to such personal data took place, the Facebook
user: was informed that the app wished to access such personal data;
was told what data was sought, and how it would be used; and was
given the opportunity to give or withhold their consent for such

aGcess.

To the extent that the App collected information about the Facebook
Messages of users of the App, the individuals who had exchanged such
messages with users of the App: were not informed that such
information was being collected; and were not asked to consent to the
collection of such information. To the extent that the App collected
information in this way, the Facebook Companies permitted it to do so:
it was not a breach of the Platform Policy for the App to operate in this
way. By permitting the App to operate in this way, the Facebook
16
49.

50.

ol.

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Companies unfairly processed the personal data of the individuals who

had exchanged Facebook messages with users of the App.

By reason of the matters set out at paragraphs 46 to 48 above:

e any consent purportedly given by the Facebook friends of users of the
App, so as to permit the App to collect their personal data, was not

freely given, specific or informed;

e hence any such consent was ineffective and invalid and did not

provide a lawful basis for the processing in question.

Further, the Facebook Companies permitted the App to operate on the
Facebook Platform, in circumstances where the Facebook Companies
failed to take any steps, or any sufficient steps, to monitor whether the
App was being operated in breach of the Platform Policy. The Facebook
Companies thereby unfairly processed the personal data of: users of the
App; Facebook friends of users of the App; and individuals who
exchanged Facebook messages with users of the App. In the case of all
of these groups, Facebook unfairly exposed them to a serious risk that

their personal data would be used in breach of the Platform Policy.

Breach of DPP7

The Facebook Companies acted in breach of DPP7, by failing to take
appropriate technical and organisational measures against the
unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data of: users of the
App; Facebook friends of users of the App; and individuals who

exchanged Facebook messages with users of the App.
52.

dn

54.

a
1C O @
Information Commissioner's Office
To the extent that the personal data of such individuals was processed

by Dr. Kogan and/or GSR, such processing was both unauthorised and

unlawful:

e The processing was unauthorised, in that it was inconsistent with the
basis on which the Facebook Companies permitted Dr. Kogan and/or
GSR to obtain access to personal data of which they were data
controller. In particular, such processing was in breach of the

Platform Policy and the Undertaking, as explained above.

e The processing was unlawful, in that it constituted unfair processing

by Dr. Kogan and/or GSR of the personal data of those individuals.

The Facebook Companies took no steps, or no adequate steps, to guard

against such unauthorised or unlawful processing:

e The Facebook Companies did not review the terms and conditions
offered to users of the App, in order to assess whether those terms
and conditions were consistent with the Platform Policy. Nor did the
Facebook Companies establish any system for such monitoring of the

content of the terms and conditions to take place.

e The Facebook Companies took no steps to monitor whether the App
was being operated in a manner consistent with the Platform Policy

and the Undertaking.

The fact that the Facebook Companies failed to take any or any adequate
steps in this regard, is confirmed by the fact that it was not until an
article was published in the Guardian newspaper on 11 December 2015
that the Facebook Companies became aware that the App had been

operated in breach of the Platform Policy and the Undertaking.
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The issuing of a monetary penalty

55. The Commissioner’s view is that the conditions for imposing a monetary

penalty notice have been met in this case.

56. The Commissioner considers that this contravention was serious:

e It affected a very large number of individuals.

e Asaresult of the contravention, a very substantial volume of personal
data was shared with third parties by Dr. Kogan and/or GSR, without
the relevant data subjects being made aware of this or being given

the opportunity to consent to the data sharing.

e Personal data of UK Users was put at serious risk of being shared with
third parties and of being used in connection with political

campaigning.

e In respect of UK Users who were US residents but who accessed the
Facebook platform from within the UK, that risk is very likely to have

eventuated in respect of some of these individuals.

57. The Commissioner considers that this contravention was of a kind likely
to cause substantial distress. Individuals were likely to be distressed by
the fact that Facebook had permitted and/or enabled the App to operate
in the manner set out above, and had failed to take adequate steps to
protect their personal data. The extensive disclosure of personal data to
third parties, without the data subjects being aware of such disclosure

and therefore being unable to prevent it, was also likely to cause

19
®
1CcO.
Information Commissioner's Office
distress. This is particularly the case given that personal data of UK
Users was put at serious risk of being used in connection with or for the
purposes of political campaigning, a use which would have fallen outside
any reasonable expectation of the data subjects. The nature of such

distress and/or the number of individuals likely to be distressed, were

sufficient to establish that the distress was substantial.

58. The Commissioner considers that the Facebook Companies knew or
ought reasonably to have known that there was a serious risk that the
contravention would (a) occur, and (b) be of a kind likely to cause
substantial distress. She further considers that the Facebook Companies

failed to take reasonable steps to prevent such a contravention, in that:

(1) The Facebook Companies, viewed collectively, are a large, well-
resourced and experienced data controller. They should have

been aware of the risks.

(2) The Facebook Companies had ample opportunity over a long
period of time to implement appropriate technical and
organisational measures in respect of the matters set out above,
but failed to do so.

59. The Commissioner's conclusion is therefore that the statutory conditions
for issuing a monetary penalty have been met. She has considered all
the circumstances and has reached the view that it is appropriate to

issue a monetary penalty in this case.

The amount of the monetary penalty which the Commissioner has

decided to issue

20
60.

61.

62..

ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The Commissioner has taken into account her underlying objective in
imposing a monetary penalty notice, namely to promote compliance with
the DPA. She considers that, given the nature, seriousness and potential
consequences of the contravention arising in this case, that objective

would not be adequately served by an unduly lenient penalty.

When they became aware of the inappropriate access to users personal
data, and its extent, in 2015 the Facebook Companies began to take
steps to ensure that accessed personal data was deleted by those who
had it in their possession. Those measures were however ineffective and
slow, particularly in the context where there were concerns about the
integrity of the App developer’s actions. The Facebook Companies did
not follow up with the parties involved quickly, allowing them months to
certify that the data had been deleted. The Facebook Companies did not
challenge statements made by SCL Elections Limited in its return which
in effect rendered their certification useless, and did not follow up by
proposing an audit of the systems of recipients of the data, backed by
suspension from its platform, until] 2018. This poor response in the
context of the Facebook Companies’ scale and resources is an

aggravating factor considered by the Commissioner.

The Commissioner has taken into account the following mitigating

factors:

(1) Once the Facebook Companies became aware of the matters raised
in the Guardian article of 11 December 2015, they immediately
terminated the App’s access to the Facebook Platform, and

investigated the way in which the App had been operated.

(2) During the course of the Commissioner’s investigation the

Facebook Companies have been co-operative, including by

2 |
63.

64.

65.

66.

Oss

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

providing details answers to successive Information Notices served

by the Commissioner.

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided that
a penalty in the sum of £500,000 is appropriate given the particular facts

of the case and the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.

The Commissioner has considered evidence of the Facebook Companies’
financial position. She does not consider that the payment of a penalty
of the above amount would cause the Facebook Companies undue

hardship.

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 24 November 2018 at the latest. The
monetary penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into
the Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account
at the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
23 November 2018 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary
penalty by 20% to £400,000 (four hundred thousand pounds).
However, you should be aware that the early payment discount is not

available if you decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

a) the imposition of the monetary penalty

and/or;

22
68.

69.

70.

Information Commissioner’s Office

b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days
of the date of this monetary penalty notice. Information about appeals

is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In Scotland,
the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as an extract
registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution issued by the

sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

23
Dated 24 October 2018

Signed

 

Elizabeth Denham

Information Commissioner
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF

24

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office
ANNEX 1

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

Ls Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon

whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a

right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the

‘Tribunal’) against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a)

b)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as

could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

aa You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

25
a)

b)

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state: -

a)

b)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;
if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice

of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

26
ae

1C O O

Information Commissioner's Office
Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of, and
Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure
(First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009
(Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).

27