TO:

Of:

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Grove Pension Solutions Limited

Grove House, London Road, Halstead, Sevenoaks, Kent TN14 7DS

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Grove Pension Solutions Limited (“Grove”) with a monetary penalty
under section 55A of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty
is in relation to a serious contravention of Regulation 22 of the Privacy
and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003
(“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Grove, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 06045836), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
instigated the transmission of unsolicited communications by means of
electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of direct

marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.

Regulation 22 of PECR states:
@

1cO.

Information Commissioner's Office
“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited

communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
10,

iD
1C O oO
Information Commissioner's Office
Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing

material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Individual” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a living individual

and includes an unincorporated body of such individuals”.

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “any text,
voice, sound or image message sent over a public electronic
communications network which can be stored in the network or in the
recipient’s terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and

includes messages sent using a short message service”.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

The term “soft opt-in” is used to describe the rule set out in in
Regulation 22(3) of PECR. In essence, an organisation may be able to
contact its existing customers by electronic mail even if they haven't
specifically consented to electronic mail. The soft opt-in rule can only

be relied upon by the organisation that collected the contact details.

Section 55A of the DPA (as amended by the Privacy and Electronic
Communications (EC Directive)(Amendment) Regulations 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) states:

“(1) The Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty if

the Commissioner is satisfied that —
11.

12.

13.

Oo
1CcO.
Information Commissioner's Office
(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements

of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC

Directive) Regulations 2003 by the person,
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person —

(a) knew or ought to have Known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see

paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

1CO.

Information Commlssioner’s Office

Grove came to the attention of the Commissioner following intelligence
received from the Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”) regarding
concerns around the organisation’s use of electronic mail for the

purposes of direct marketing.

Subsequent internal investigations carried out by the Commissioner
suggested that there had in fact been two separate complaints made
by subscribers via the ICO’s Online Reporting Tool in respect of

unsolicited marketing emails promoting the services of Grove.

In light of these findings the Commissioner, on 2 October 2017, sent
an initial investigation letter to Grove asking questions as to their direct
marketing practices, and setting out her concerns regarding their

compliance with PECR.

A substantive response was provided by Grove on 25 October 2017
which advised that they utilised the services of a third party marketing
agent to carry out a range of marketing functions on their behalf,
including lead generation. Grove, by extension through this marketing
agent, would work with ‘email providers’, who essentially provided a
hosted marketing service by sending out “pre-approved emails” to
opted-in subscribers contained within data sets which they themselves

Supplied.

The ‘email providers’ would obtain the consents of subscribers through
a number of websites. For the purposes of the Commissioner’s
investigation the consents obtained through the following websites
were of particular relevance: www.testing12free.co.uk;

www.soapboxsurvey.co.uk; and www.prizereactor.co.uk.
19.

20.

21.

2.

23.

24.

Information Commissioner's Office

The intended recipients of these emails would not have had a previous

relationship with Grove.

The Commissioner has examined the information which each of the
websites used by the ‘email providers’ would provide to subscribers at
the point of consent; including the terms and conditions, and the
privacy policies of those sites. She has found that at no point are Grove
specifically named as an organisation from, or about, whom recipients

may receive direct marketing.

On 31 January 2018 the Commissioner contacted Grove to request
details of the due diligence carried out in respect of the ‘email
providers’. In response Grove confirmed that they, in conjunction with
their marketing agent, had sought the advice of a recognised specialist
data protection consultancy regarding the use of hosted email for lead
generation purposes; furthermore they had checked this advice with an
independent data protection solicitor. Grove then instructed their
marketing agent to contractually engage the services of the ‘email
providers’ for the purposes of carrying out hosted marketing campaigns

advertising the services of Grove.

Grove confirmed to the Commissioner that between the dates of 31
October 2016 and 31 October 2017, there were a total of 2,108,924
direct marketing emails sent to subscribers advertising the products of
Grove, of which 1,942,010 were delivered.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute
a contravention of regulation 22 of PECR by Grove and, if so, whether

the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.

6
25:

26.

2/.

28.

29.

30.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Grove has contravened regulation 22 of
PECR.

The Commissioner finds that between the dates of 31 October 2016
and 31 October 2017, Grove instigated the transmission of 1,942,010
direct marketing emails to subscribers contrary to regulation 22 of
PECR.

Organisations cannot generally send marketing emails unless the
recipient has notified the sender that they consent to such emails being
sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender. This principle applies
equally to organisations who seek to utilise the services of third parties

to send direct marketing on their behalf.

As the instigator of the direct marketing emails, it is incumbent on
Grove to ensure that it is compliant with the requirements of regulation
22 of PECR, and to ensure that valid consent to send those messages

had been acquired.

It is the case that to be valid, consent must be freely given, specific
and informed, and involve a positive indication signifying the

individual’s agreement.

The Commissioner’s direct marketing guidance says “organisations
need to be aware that indirect consent (i.e. where a subscriber tells
one organisation that they consent to receive marketing from other
organisations) will not be enough for texts, emails or automated calls.
This is because the rules on electronic marketing are stricter, to reflect

the more intrusive nature of electronic messages.”
31.

Ze.

ok

34.

35.

@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
However, the guidance goes on to say that indirect consent can be
valid but only if it is clear and specific enough, reference to ‘general

third parties’ will not be sufficient to demonstrate valid consent. The

key issue is what the subscriber is told at the point consent is obtained.

Consent will not be “informed” if individuals do not understand what
they are consenting to. Organisations should therefore always ensure
that the language used is clear, easy to understand, and not hidden
away in a privacy policy or small print. Consent will not be valid if
individuals are asked to agree to receive marketing from “similar
organisations”, “partners”, “selected third parties” or other similar
generic description. Further, consent will not be valid where an
individual is presented with a long, seemingly exhaustive list of general

categories of organisations.

From review of the relevant privacy policies it is clear to the
Commissioner that Grove are not specifically named, or identified in
such a way that would suggest they could lawfully instigate direct
marketing to subscribers. Further, the privacy policies referred to list a
wide range of sectors about which subscribers may receive marketing,
and also fail to provide subscribers with the option to specify the types

of marketing they would wish to receive.

Whilst it is acknowledged by the Commissioner that Grove obtained
external advice regarding the legality of their hosted marketing
campaign, a simple review of the customer journey would have

exposed the issues apparent with the consents being relied upon.

Therefore the Commissioner is satisfied that, notwithstanding the steps
taken by Grove to ensure the veracity of the consents being relied

upon, those consents were not sufficiently informed, specific, or freely
36.

Cre

38.

Ses

40.

41.

Information Commissioner's Office

given and therefore did not amount to valid consent for the purposes of
regulation 22 PECR.

Since it does not appear that Grove have had a prior relationship with
the subscribers who received marketing for their products, they would
also not be able to rely on the ‘soft opt-in’ exception provided under
regulation 22(3) of PECR.

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner finds that Grove
did not have the necessary valid consent for the 1,942,010 direct

marketing emails for which it instigated transmission to subscribers.

The Commissioner is satisfied that Grove was responsible for this
contravention and has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA were met.
Seriousness of the contravention

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because between the dates of 31 October
2016 and 31 October 2017 a total of 1,942,010 direct marketing emails
were transmitted at the instigation of Grove and received by
subscribers advertising marketing material for which they had not

provided consent.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A(1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified

above was deliberate.
42.

43.

44,

45.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner considers that in this case Grove did not deliberately
contravene regulation 22 of PECR. That is to say that whilst Grove did
seek to instigate direct marketing to subscribers, there appears to have

been no deliberate intention on the part of Grove to breach PECR.

The Commissioner has therefore gone on to consider whether the
contraventions identified above were negligent. First, she has
considered whether Grove knew or ought reasonably to have known
that there was a risk that these contraventions would occur. She is
satisfied that this condition is met, given that the issue of unsolicited
emails have been widely publicised by the media as being a problem.
Furthermore, it would be reasonable to expect an organisation who is
registered with the ICO to be aware of their obligations under PECR
and to carry out steps to ensure compliance when engaging in the

instigation of direct marketing.

Second, the Commissioner considered whether Grove failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions. The Commissioner has
published detailed guidance for those carrying out direct marketing
explaining their legal obligations under PECR. This guidance gives clear
advice regarding the requirements of consent for direct marketing and
explains the circumstances under which organisations are able to carry
out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by post, or by fax. In
particular it states that organisations can generally only send, or
instigate, marketing emails to individuals if that person has specifically

consented to receiving them from the sender.

Reasonable steps to be expected of Grove could also have included for
instance carrying out due diligence checks to ensure that they were
specifically named within the privacy policies of the websites from
which the consents had been obtained.

10
46.

47.

48.

Information Commissioner’s Office

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that Grove failed to

take reasonable steps to prevent the contraventions.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to issue a monetary penalty

The Commissioner has taken the following mitigating factors into

account:

e Grove say that they engaged in “extensive consultation” with a
recognised specialist data protection consultancy regarding the
use of hosted email for lead generation purposes. This is
accepted by the Commissioner, and demonstrates that Grove had
at least an awareness of their obligations under the legislation,
and of a generally positive and pro-active approach to data

protection;

e The number of complaints received was minimal. Although the
Commissioner would maintain that the seriousness of the
contravention is dictated by the number of unlawful messages
received by subscribers, rather than the amount of complaints

which arose as a result of the contravention;

e There is no evidence to suggest that Grove has engaged in
unlawful direct marketing beyond the period set out within this

Notice;
49.

aU,

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Information Commissioner’s Office

e Grove has co-operated with the Commissioner’s investigation

throughout.

The mitigating factors outlined above allowed the Commissioner to
impose a lower penalty than a contravention of this size might usually

attract.

The Commissioner has considered the likely impact of a monetary
penalty on Grove and has decided on the information that is available
to her, that Grove has access to sufficient financial resources to pay
the proposed monetary penalty without causing undue financial

hardship.

For the reasons explained above, the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A (1) DPA have been met in this case. She is
also satisfied that the procedural rights under section 55B have been

complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent, in which the
Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking. In reaching her final
view, the Commissioner has taken into account the representations

made by Grove on this matter.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances, she

should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary

penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The sending of

12
56.

as i

58,

59.

oO

1C QO.

Information Commissioner's Office
unsolicited marketing emails is a matter of significant public concern. A
monetary penalty in this case should act as a general encouragement
towards compliance with the law, or at least as a deterrent against
non-compliance, on the part of all persons running businesses currently
engaging in these practices. The issuing of a monetary penalty will

reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

messaging those who specifically consent to receive marketing.

For these reasons, the Commissioner has decided to issue a monetary

penalty in this case

The amount of the penalty

Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided
that a penalty in the sum of £40,000 (forty thousand pounds) is
reasonable and proportionate given the particular facts of the case and

the underlying objective in imposing the penalty.
Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 24 April 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
23 April 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £32,000 (thirty two thousand pounds). However, you

should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

13
60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)

against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days

of the date of this monetary penalty notice.
Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:

e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary
penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner as
an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

14
Dated the 22" day of March 2019

 

signed cr

Andy White

Director of High Profile Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 SAF

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office
1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1
SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998
RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

i Section 55B(5) of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice has been served a right of appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the

notice.
2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in

accordance with the law; or

D) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her

discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the

Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal

at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

16
a)

D)

Information Commissioner’s Office

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the

Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this

rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a)

b)

C)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)

your name and address/name and address of your representative

(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;

the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the

monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the

reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your

solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may

17
Information Commissioner's Office

conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom

he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights) are contained in section 55B(5) of, and Schedule
6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory
Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).