For information on how we process
personal data visit www.ico.org.uk/privacy-notice

@
1C O Wycliffe House, Water Lane, Wilmslow, Cheshire, SK9 SAF
O T. 0303 123 1113 F. 01625 524510

Information Commissioner's Office www.ico.org.uk

TO:

Of:

DATA PROTECTION ACT 2018
(PART 6, SECTION 149)

ENFORCEMENT POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
100 Parliament Square, London SWIA 2BQ

Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (“HMRC”) is a “data
controller” as variously defined in sections 3(6), 5 and of the Data
Protection Act 2018 (“the DPA”) and Article 4(7) of the General
Data Protection Regulation (“the GDPR”). HRMC is the tax,
payments and customs authority of the United Kingdom. It
processes personal data in the course of carrying out its

functions.

The Information Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) has decided
to issue HMRC with an Enforcement Notice under section 149
DPA. The Notice is in relation to contraventions of the data
protection principles set out in Article 5 GDPR. This Notice is
accordingly issued under section 149(2)(a) DPA.

This Notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

B

1 Mixed Sources
P fmmaliecttt yy) (Hips Prop eet ina ged
feeeone, errbied él comers and

recycled wood or fiber

Cert no TF COC-002272

wer [sc org
© 1996 Forest Stewardship Council
1CO.

Information Commissloner’s Office

Legal framework for this Notice

The DPA contains enforcement provisions in Part 6 which are

exercisable by the Commissioner.

section 149 DPA materially provides:

“(1) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has failed,
or is failing, as described in subsection (2), (3), (4) or (5), the
Commissioner may give the person a written notice (an
“enforcement notice”) which requires the person—

(a) to take steps specified in the notice, or

(b) to refrain from taking steps specified in the notice,
or both (and see also sections 150 and 151).

(2) The first type of failure is where a controller or processor has
failed, or is failing, to comply with any of the following—
(a) a provision of Chapter II of the GDPR or Chapter 2 of
Part 3 or Chapter 2 of Part 4 of this Act (principles of
processing);
(b) a provision of Articles 12 to 22 of the GDPR or Part 3 or
4 of this Act conferring rights on a data subject;
(c) a provision of Articles 25 to 39 of the GDPR or section
64 or 65 of this Act (obligations of controllers and
processors);
(d) a requirement to communicate a personal data breach
to the Commissioner or a data subject under section 67, 68
or 108 of this Act;
(e) the principles for transfers of personal data to third
countries, non-Convention countries and international FSC
Mixed Sources

bohiet or
timely controlled mautars and
recycled wood or fiber

©

www fsc org
‘orest Slew.

& (996 F Stewardship Council
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

organisations in Articles 44 to 49 of the GDPR or in sections
73 to 78 or 109 of this Act.

(6) An enforcement notice given in reliance on subsection (2), (3)
or (5) may only impose requirements which the Commissioner
considers appropriate for the purpose of remedying the failure.”

Section 150 DPA materially provides:

“(1) An enforcement notice must—
(a) state what the person has failed or is failing to do, and
(b) give the Commissioner’s reasons for reaching that

Opinion.

(2) In deciding whether to give an enforcement notice in reliance
on section 149(2), the Commissioner must consider whether the
failure has caused or is likely to cause any person damage or

distress.

(3) In relation to an enforcement notice given in reliance on
section 149(2), the Commissioner’s power under section
149(1)(b) to require a person to refrain from taking specified
steps includes power—
(a) to impose a ban relating to all processing of personal
data, or
(b) to impose a ban relating only to a specified description
of processing of personal data, including by specifying one

or more of the following—

(i) a description of personal data; 43
7 ne FSC
(ii) the purpose or manner of the processing; ined Sources

feinhaet grovp from wre! rie
3 lneesls, controlled seeeres and
recyded wood or Ilber

ect no, TT-COC-002272
ww fsc.org
€ 1996 Fores! Stewardship Council
1cO.

Information Commissioner's Office

(iii) the time when the processing takes place.

(4) An enforcement notice may specify the time or times at
which, or period or periods within which, a requirement imposed
by the notice must be complied with (but see the restrictions in
subsections (6) to (8)).”

73 Article 4 GDPR contains definitions of relevant terms. Along with
the definition of personal data and controller, Article 4(14) defines

“biometric data”:

“biometric data’ means personal data resulting from specific
technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or
behavioural characteristics of a natural person, which allow or
confirm the unique identification of that natural person, such as

facial images or dactyloscopic data”

8. The data protection principles are now set out in Article 5(1)
GDPR. Compliance with the principles is the responsibility of the
controller: Article 5(2). The first principle (“DPP1”) is provided for
in Article 5(1)(a):

“Personal data shall be...processed lawfully, fairly and in a
transparent manner in relation to the data subject (lawfulness,

fairness and transparency’)”.

9, For processing to be lawful under DPP1, processing must be in
accordance with one of the bases set out in Article 6 GDPR,

relevantly including: J \

Mixed Sources
Prd \ from gel managed
4 fuveere controlled seme and
recycled wood or flber
mt no, TI-COC-002272

ww Bec of
© 1996 Fores Stewastship Council
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

“1. Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at
least one of the following applies:
(a) the data subject has given consent to the processing of
his or her personal data for one or more specific purposes;

f

10. Further, to be lawful under DPP1, when the processing relates to
special categories of personal data, it must be in accordance with
Article 9 GDPR, which provides:

“1. Processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin,
political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union
membership, and the processing of genetic data, biometric data
for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person, data
concerning health or data concerning a natural person’s sex life
or sexual orientation shall be prohibited.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the following applies:
(a) the data subject has given explicit consent to the
processing of those personal data for one or more specified
purposes, except where Union or Member State law provide
that the prohibition referred to in paragraph 1 may not be
lifted by the data subject;

uv

11. Chapter III of the GDPR makes provision for the rights afforded to
data subjects. These include the rights of subject access,
rectification, erasure and restriction of processing.

Mixed Sources
Avy t [Lamanaged
5 foneelé, controlled sexinpre and
recycled wood aor fiber
rimiair COCc-002272

no TT-
www ifsc org
1996 Forest Stewardihip Counti
1cO.

Information Commissioner's Office

12.

13.

14,

15.

HMRC’s processing of Personal Data

The Commissioner’s investigation into HMRC has focussed on its
use of voice authentication (‘Voice ID’) for customer verification
on some of its helplines since January 2017. The Commissioner’s
understanding of HMRC’s processing and her findings below are
based primarily on the information she has received during her
investigation following a complaint by ‘Big Brother Watch’ into
HMRC’s conduct.

HMRC rolled out its Voice ID service in January 2017. It has
enrolled around 7 million customers on this service.

The Voice ID service authenticates customers when they call
HMRC’s helplines through their voice. The characteristics of a
person's voice constitute biometric data. HMRC processes this
biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying natural
persons when they call its helplines.

HMRC collected this biometric data when customers called some

of its helplines. When they passed the standard (i.e. non-Voice

ID) verification process they were given some information about

the Voice ID service. As part of the initial complaint, Big Brother

Watch shared two call transcripts detailing the experience of

customers calling the HMRC helplines. These show that customers

were informed via an automated recording that HMRC was

introducing a ‘quicker and more secure’ means of verifying

identification. The benefits of the system and how Voice ID works

were explained, although the recording did not give details of 6
‘3

where customers could find further information. The automated
FSC
Mixed Sources

Proc
forests, controlled strijtewe and
recycled wood or Aber
———————

no. TT COC-0022
weow [sc org
© 1996 Forest Stereardthip Council
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

16.

17.

18.

recording did not inform customers that they did not have to sign
up to the service. Customers were asked to repeat, “my voice is
my password”, and there was no clear option for callers who did

not wish to register.

HMRC collected this biometric data before it published a Voice ID-
specific privacy notice on 27 July 2018 and prior to the week of 8
October 2018 when it made further changes to the automated
recording and options were presented to the customers.

HMRC has endeavoured to contact the customers whose biometric
data it collected before it made these changes. The latest figures
provided to the Commissioner (which HMRC Says are correct as of
4 March 2019) indicate that roughly 20% of the 7 million
customers whose biometric data was collected have responded to
HMRC’s subsequent contact. Of these:

a. 995,938 customers provided consent for HMRC to
continuing processing their data; and

b. 260,551 customers withheld consent.

HMRC has informed the Commissioner that it has deleted the

biometric data of 156,360 customers who withheld consent as at

3 January 2019. HMRC has confirmed that it is able to identify the

remaining data of roughly 5.5 million customers for which it does

not have explicit consent. It has also shown that it is able to

delete this data.
5
FSC

Mixed Sources
Produce jay) ite sw -emenaged

7 tniests, coeripillee petiiens and
recycled wood or fiber
1CO.

information Commissloner’s Office

ee

20.

21.

22.

The Contravention

In the circumstances, the Commissioner is satisfied that HMRC
has committed the following contravention of the GDPR.

Lawful Processing: DPP1i

HMRC has contravened DPP1 in that it has and continues to
process personal data by collecting, retaining and using biometric
data through its Voice ID service, without having a lawful basis
for so doing under Articles 6 and 9.

Under Article 6(1), processing is only lawful if it is on one of the
listed bases. None of these exist in this case. HMRC cannot rely
on the customers having given consent (Article 6(1)(a)) as the
automated recording failed to obtain adequate consent: the
recording failed to give customers sufficient information on how
their biometric data would be processed and failed to give them
an opportunity to give or withhold consent to such processing.

Further, under Article 9, processing of special categories of
personal data is prohibited unless at least one of the conditions in
Article 9(2) is satisfied. The biometric data processed by HMRC is
special category data within the meaning of Article 9(1). None of
the conditions in Article 9(2) is satisfied. HMRC cannot rely on
Article 9(2)(a), the only potentially relevant condition, as the
customers did not provide explicit consent. The automated
recording failed to obtain explicit consent for the same reasons
that it failed to obtain adequate consent for the purposes of
Article 6. FSC

Mixed Sources
Product group from evel ttianaged

8 forests, controlled stim and
recyded wood or fiber
Cert no, TT-COC-002272
www.fse or
© 1996 Forest Slewardship Council
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

23.

24.

25.

In the absence of a basis for processing under Article 6 anda
condition under Article 9, the retention of this personal data is

unlawful.

Issue of the Notice

The Commissioner considers that the contravention is a
significant one which warrant enforcement action. Her reasons for

this conclusion include that:

e An extremely large number of data subjects are affected.

e HMRC collected this personal data in circumstances where
there was a significant imbalance of power between it and
its customers. It did not explain to customers how they
could decline to participate in the Voice ID system. It also
did not explain that customers would not suffer a
detrimental impact if it declined to participate.

e The imbalance of power may still be a factor in the number
of customers who have not withheld consent, especially
where customers rely on HMRC for benefit purposes.

e HMRC appears to have given little or no consideration to the
data protection principles when rolling out the Voice ID

service.

The Commissioner considered, as she is required to do under
section 150(2) DPA when deciding whether to serve an
Enforcement Notice, whether any contravention has caused or is

©

likely to cause any person damage or distress. The Commissioner
does not conclude that damage or distress is likely in the present psc

Mixed Sources
Perel t gr compe Creoery ines inijtutjiel
9 leew, controled pamela Und
recyded wood or fiber

eri na, TT-COC-002272
ico.

Information Commissloner’s Office

context. However, data subjects are likely to be concerned about
the processing of their personal data in the manner set out
above, in circumstances where the full nature of that processing
is not clearly drawn to their attention and they were not given an
opportunity to provide or withhold consent at the time their data

was collected.

26. Furthermore, and in any event, the Commissioner considers that
compliance with the principles in Article 6 and Article 9 to be a
matter of central importance to data protection law. Even if a
failure to comply has not, or is not likely, to cause any person
damage or distress, the issue of this Enforcement Notice to
compel compliance would nonetheless be an appropriate exercise

of the Commissioner’s enforcement powers.

27. The Commissioner has also had regard to HMRC’s attempts
retrospectively to obtain explicit consent for the processing.
Though these efforts are welcome (and have resulted in 995,938
customers providing consent) they do not make it lawful for
HMRC to continue processing the remaining personal data of

roughly 5.5 million customers.

28. Having regard to the significant nature of the contravention, the
scale of the personal data being processed and the context in
which it is processed, the Commissioner considers that this
Enforcement Notice is the proportionate regulatory step to bring
HMRC into compliance.

29. In view of the above, and in exercise of her powers under section ° 5

149(2)(a) DPA, the Commissioner requires HMRC to take the aa

Mixed Sources
ty ur aged

Priliey group from sell emenag

1 O ‘teats, controlled suyipers and
recyded wood or fiber
er no, TT-COC-002272

wow Isc org
© 1996 Fores! Stewardihip Councll
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

30.

steps specified in Annex 1 within 28 days of this Notice.

Consequences of failing to comply with this Enforcement
Notice

If a person fails to comply with an Enforcement Notice the
Commissioner may serve a penalty notice on that person under
section 155(1)(b) DPA requiring payment of an amount up to 20
million Euros, or 4% of an undertaking’s total annual worldwide

turnover whichever is the higher.

11

B

FSC

Mixed Sources
Product group from well-ma

farests, controlled sources and
recycled wood or fi
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Consequences of failing to comply with this Enforcement
Notice

31. By virtue of section 162(1)(c) DPA, there is a right of appeal
against this Notice to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights).
If an appeal is brought this Notice need not be complied with
pending determination or withdrawal of that appeal. Information
about the appeals process may be obtained from:

First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
GRC & GRP Tribunals

PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

Tel: 0300 1234504

Fax: 0870 739 5836

Email: GRC@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk

Website: www.justice.gov.uk/tribunals/general-regulatory-
chamber

32. Any Notice of Appeal should be served on the Tribunal within 28
calendar days of the date on which this Notice is sent.

Dated the 9" day of May 2019

Signed: ....

 

Steve Wood

Deputy Commissioner (Executive Director — Policy)

Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire °

SK9 5AF
FSC
1 2 Mixed Sources
Prpaaiuet (jecmayt Breve. opel itiamanpeel
Pacyaled OG or thes :
Cert no Tr-coc 002272

www fscorg
© 1996 Forest Stewaithip Courrl
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

ANNEX 1

TERMS OF THE ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

HMRC shall, within 28 days following the date of this Notice (and

following the permissible time for appealing this notice):

e Delete all of the biometric data held under the Voice ID system

for which it does not have explicit consent.

e Require its suppliers who operate, manage or are involved in the
Voice ID system to delete all the biometric data they process
under the Voice ID system for which it does not have explicit
consent.

,
1 3 Mixed Sources
Pipatlatt group from jell ean
tinwett, controlled savcoes and

recycled wood or fibar
ert no TT-COC 002272

ww frcarg
© 1996 Forest Stewardship Council