
Completion of planned supervision by the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps
Published 09-07-2019
Decision
Public authorities
The Data Inspectorate has just completed a planned audit at the Ministry of Defense's Audit Corps in October 2018, where the audit focused on the rights of the data subjects. Journal number: 2018-813-0002
Summary
The Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has been among the authorities selected by the Data Inspectorate in 2018 for supervision under the Law Enforcement Act [1]. The Data Inspectorate's planned supervision of the Ministry of Defense's Auditor's Corps focused in particular on the rights of the data subjects, which are found in section 3 of the Law Enforcement Act.
At the request of the Data Inspectorate, in the autumn of 2018, in connection with the audit visit, the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps completed a questionnaire and submitted this along with additional material to the audit. The audit visit took place on October 23, 2018.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate has noted that the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has assessed that at the time of the audit visit, the Audit Corps has not yet been in a situation where the authority has been obliged to give notice under section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2nd
Following the oversight of the Ministry of Defense's Audit Corps, the Data Inspectorate finds reason to conclude:

That the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has complied with the requirements of section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. First
That notification of the accused in specific military criminal cases must immediately be done in accordance with the rules of the Military Procedure Act and thus not section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2, and that the interaction between the Law Enforcement Act, the Military Procedure Act and the Judicial Code is not entirely clear, which is why the Data Protection Authority has decided to enter into dialogue with the Ministry of Justice here.
That the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has not received any requests for insight under section 15 of the Law Enforcement Act or requests for rectification, deletion and restriction of treatment under section 17 of the Law Enforcement Act.

Against this background, the Danish Data Protection Agency considers the audit to be complete and does not take any further action in this regard.
A more detailed review of the Danish Data Protection Agency's conclusions follows below.
1. Obligation to provide information
1.1. The duty to provide information under section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1
Section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. Paragraph 1 requires the data controller to provide a number of information to the data subject.
This is the following information:

Identity and Contact Information for Data Managers.
Contact information for the data protection advisor and information on its function in relation to the data subjects.
The purposes of the processing for which the personal data is to be used.
The right to file a complaint with a supervisory authority and contact information for the supervisory authority.
The rights of the data subject pursuant to Chapters 5 and 6 of the Act.
The right to have the competent supervisory authority exercise the data subject's rights in relation to the decisions of the competent authorities regarding omission, deferral, restriction or refusal pursuant to chapters 4-6, cf. section 40 (2) of the Act. 1, No. 10.

For example, the Audit Corps has submitted a text on the processing of personal data, which was publicly available on the Audit Corps website at the time of the audit visit.
In addition, the Audit Corps has sent a copy of the authority's autoresponder, which is automatically sent to persons who send an email to the authority.
The published website text contains the information required by section 13 (1) of the Act. 1, Nos. 1-6.
In addition, the Audit Corps has listed in the text some of the information that the authority is obliged to provide in a request for access, cf. section 15 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2. In connection with the listing, the Audit Corps has not made it clear that the listing does not deal with all the information that must be given pursuant to section 15 (1) of the Act. 2nd
It is not a requirement under section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1, that the data controller provides the information to be provided in a request for access, cf. section 15 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2nd
If the controller chooses to list the information that must be provided in accordance with section 15 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2, the data controller should either provide all the information mentioned in the provision or clarify that the listing is merely an extract of the information to be provided.
The Audit Corps has stated that the Authority's autoresponder is given in order to fulfill the disclosure requirement under the Data Protection Regulation, and that in doing so, the Audit Corps has also chosen to provide the information required under the Law Enforcement Act, as the Authority considers this to be a good service.
The comments on the draft law on law enforcement authorities' processing of personal data [2] show that the data controller's obligation to make the information available can be fulfilled by making the information available on the competent authority's website or through printed material available to the registered.
Thus, it is not a requirement that the Audit Corps provide the information required by section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1, in an autoresponder.
A review of the autoresponder shows that the Audit Corps has not provided all the information required under section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1 - like the wording in the autoresponder about e.g. purpose (contrary to the text on the website) is not seen to describe all the purposes. At the end of the autoresponder, however, it is pointed out that if you want to know more, you can read more about the rules on the Audit Corps website www.fauk.dk.
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate recommends that the Audit Corps either extend the autoresponder with the necessary information required by the Law Enforcement Act or simply refer to the published text on the authority's website in relation to the Law Enforcement Act - preferably with a direct link to the text. The Data Inspectorate has not assessed whether the autoresponder meets the requirements of Article 13 of the Data Protection Regulation.
1.2. The duty to provide information under section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2
Section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. Paragraph 2 requires that the data controller, when necessary for the data subject to be able to protect his interests, must, as a minimum, provide the registered message as follows:

The legal basis for the treatment.
The period during which the personal data will be stored or, if this is not possible, the criteria used to determine this period.
The categories of potential recipients of personal data, including in third countries or international organizations.
Additional information, if necessary, in particular if the personal data is collected without the knowledge of the data subject.

The Audit Corps has stated that the Audit Corps has not yet been in a situation where, in the opinion of the Authority, there has been an obligation to give notice pursuant to section 13 (2). 2nd
To this end, the Audit Corps has stated that it is the authority's assessment that the fact that a registered person is charged with a violation does not in itself mean that notice must be given pursuant to section 13 (2). 2, but that something more is needed.
It is clear from the comments on the draft law on law enforcement authorities' processing of personal data [3] that section 13 (1) of the Act. 2 (contrary to section 13 (1)) requires the data controller to specifically notify the data subject. In addition, it is stated that notification must be made when necessary, taking into account the specific circumstances under which the information is processed, in order to ensure the data subject's fair treatment. On the other hand, it will not be necessary to inform the data subject if there is a context in which the processing of the data cannot lead to adverse legal effects on the data subject or if it must be clear from the context in which the data was collected. for the data subject what the information is to be used for, e.g. a person who, for the purposes of a specific investigation, gives an explanation to the police.
Article 18 of the Law Enforcement Directive [4] allows Member States to provide that the exercise of the rights referred to in Articles 13, 14 and 16 - ie. the duty of disclosure, the right of disclosure and the right of rectification, deletion and limitation of treatment - must be implemented in accordance with the national law of the Member States where the personal data is contained in a judicial decision or register or case file that is processed in criminal investigations and criminal proceedings.
It is clear from preamble 49 that if personal data is processed during criminal investigation and criminal proceedings, Member States should be able to provide that the exercise of the right to information, access to and rectification or deletion of personal data and limitation of treatment must be carried out in accordance with national rules of procedure. .
In Denmark, the legislature has chosen to regulate the issue in section 18 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 3, which provides that the rules of the Civil Procedure and Military Procedures Act on the right to information, access and rectification or deletion and restriction of processing of personal data in criminal proceedings apply in relation to rights under section 3 of the Act.
It is clear from the legal remarks to section 18 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 3 [5] that the proposed provision ensures that the duty of disclosure to the data subject as well as requests for access, rectification, deletion or limitation of the processing of personal data is handled in accordance with the rules of the Administration of Justice and the Military Procedures Act to the extent that the Administration of Justice and the military administration law contains rules on this.
The same point is stated in the comments that the rules of the Civil Procedure Act are supplemented by the Military Civil Procedure Act as far as military criminal cases are concerned. This means that in such cases there may also be a restriction on the rights of the registrant with reference to military security.
In addition, the legal remarks to section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act are stated. 2 [6] that in the case of personal data contained in a specific criminal case of e.g. the police or the prosecutor's office or a court decision in a criminal case, the duty of disclosure must be carried out in accordance with the rules on notification in the Administration of Justice Act, cf. 3. This means that in these cases, the persons concerned are notified in accordance with the rules of the Code of Procedure. It can for example. be notified to the accused of the charge, cf. section 752, notification of encroachment on the secret of notification, cf. section 788, or notification of a search, cf. §798.
It follows from section 1 of the Military Procedure Act [7] that unless the military procedure is dealt with, the rules of the penal code on the handling of criminal cases apply unless otherwise provided.
It is the opinion of the Data Inspectorate that section 18 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 3, and the comments do not leave an unequivocal answer to the relationship between the Law Enforcement Act and the Judicial Code and the Military Judicial Code.
However, the Data Inspectorate's immediate assessment is that the Audit Corps's notification of the accused in specific military criminal cases will have to be in accordance with the rules of the Military Procedure Act, which, in the absence of special rule, refers to the rules of the Judicial Code - and thus not the Law Enforcement Act.
Considering that section 18 (1) of the Act. 3, and the remarks are not quite clear in relation to the interaction between the Law Enforcement Act on the one hand and the Judicial Code and the Military Justice Act on the other, the Data Inspectorate has decided in the autumn of 2018 with the Law Enforcement Act's rules on registrants' rights to enter into dialogue with the Ministry of Justice. around here.
However, the Data Inspectorate should note that in cases where the Audit Corps is obliged to give a notification under section 13 (1) of the Act. 2 of course, the authority must ensure that the notification is made and that it complies with the requirements.
1.3 Suspension, restriction or omission of notice under section 14 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1
This is stated in section 14 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1, that notice pursuant to section 13 (1). (2) may be deferred, restricted or omitted if the data subject's interest in knowing the information is found to be necessary in order to:

avoid obstructing official or judicial investigations, investigations or procedures,
avoid damaging the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offenses or the enforcement of criminal penalties;
protect public safety,
protect state security or
protect the data subject's or others' rights.

The Ministry of Defense's Audit Corps has stated that the authority has never applied section 14 (1). 1, to postpone, restrict or omit notification to registered citizens under section 13 (1). 2nd
2. Insight Court
2.1. Message of insight
The rules on the data subject's right of access are set out in Chapter 5 of the Law Enforcement Act.
According to section 15 (1) of the Act. 1, the data subject has the right to obtain the data controller's confirmation as to whether personal data on the data subject is processed.
If the data controller processes personal data about the data subject, the data controller must give the data subject access to the personal data and a communication with a number of information, cf. section 15 (1) of the Act. 2nd
This is the following information:

The objectives and legal basis of the pre-hearing.
The categories of personal information concerned.
The recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or international organizations.
Where possible, the intended period of storage or, if this is not possible, the criteria used to determine that period.
The right to request the data controller for rectification or deletion of personal data or restriction of processing concerning the data subject.
The right to lodge a complaint with the supervisory authority and the contact details of the supervisory authority.
What personal data is covered by the processing and any available information on where they originate.

The Ministry of Defense's Audit Corps has submitted two examples of answering an insightful request as well as a process description for answering an insightful request, including a template.
The Audit Corps has stated that the template has been prepared as a response to insights under both the Data Protection Regulation and the Law Enforcement Act.
The Audit Corps has further stated that the submitted examples were answered in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation and that the Audit Corps generally only received insight requests under the Data Protection Regulation.
As this supervision relates to the rules of the Law Enforcement Act, the Data Inspectorate has only assessed the template based on this set of rules. For the same reason, the Data Inspectorate has not considered the examples submitted.
A review of the template shows that the template is written as a response to a person who the Audit Corps only processes personal data on the basis of the request for insight itself and thus not cases where the Auditor corps also processes information about the request for information. On the audit visit, the Audit Corps has stated that a template will be prepared to suit several situations.
In addition, the template contains only information about access to the Data Inspectorate and contact information for the Data Inspectorate (§ 15 (2), no. 6) and information that the Audit Corps only processes information about requests for insight - including which - as a result of the request for insight itself) (§ 15 (2) (7).
The Data Inspectorate recommends that the Audit Corps - to the extent that the Authority has not already done so - prepare a new template for responding to requests for insights under the Law Enforcement Act, which fits the situations where the authority actually processes information on requests for information, and also ensures that the template contains the information required by section 15 (2) of the Law Enforcement Act.
The Data Inspectorate must also refer to section 18 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 3, and the statutory remarks thereto, cf. above. In addition, the Data Inspectorate must refer to the statutory remarks to section 15 of the Law Enforcement Act, which states that in the case of personal data contained in a specific criminal case at e.g. the police or prosecutor's office or in a judicial decision in a criminal case, the right of access must also be implemented in accordance with the rules of the Code of Procedure on access to the material in criminal proceedings and on access to judicial decisions, cf. the proposed section 18 (2). 3. Insight requests must thus be decided in accordance with the rules of the Administration of Justice Act in Chapter 3 a on access to documents, inter alia. judgments and orders and the documents in a criminal case, as well as §§ 729 a - d about the defendant's access to the material in the criminal case. Regarding data subjects whose right of access is not regulated by the rules of the Administration of Justice Act, e.g. persons acting as bystanders in a criminal case, the rules of the proposed section 3 will apply.
2.2. Suspension, restriction or refusal of access under section 16 of the Law Enforcement Act
It follows from section 16 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1, that the data controller may postpone, restrict or refuse to disclose insights if the data subject's interest in knowing the information is found to give way to the public interest considerations mentioned in section 14 (2) of the Act. First
A decision to postpone, restrict or refuse the data of the data subject shall be notified in writing to the data subject and shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons and a complaint, and the decision shall include information on the data subject's right to exercise the data subject's competent supervisory authority. rights under section 40 (2) of the Act. 10. This follows from section 16 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2nd
The Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has stated that section 16 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1, has not yet been used to postpone, restrict or refuse access under section 15 of the Act.
3. Right to rectification, deletion and restriction of treatment under section 17 of the Law Enforcement Act.
The data subject's right to rectification, deletion and restriction of treatment is set out in Chapter 6 of the Law Enforcement Act.
It follows from section 17 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 1 that the data controller must correct any information which proves to be incorrect. In addition, it is stated in the same provision that the data controller must similarly complete incomplete information if this can be done without jeopardizing the purpose of the processing. In addition, the data controller must provide correction of incorrect personal data to the competent authority from which the information originates.
According to section 17 (1) of the Act. 2, at the request of the data subject, the data controller must delete information that has been processed in violation of the processing rules in Chapter 3 of the Act or if it is required to comply with a legal obligation to which the data controller is subject.
It follows from section 17 (1) of the Act. 3, that the data controller, instead of deletion, should restrict the processing of personal data if 1) the accuracy of the personal data is disputed by the data subject and their accuracy or inaccuracy cannot be ascertained or 2) the personal data must be preserved as evidence. To the extent that a processing is limited, the data controller informs the data subject thereof before the restriction is lifted, cf. section 17 (1) of the Act. 4th
If the data controller refuses a request for rectification, deletion or restriction of processing, this must be notified in writing to the data subject and must be accompanied by a statement of reasons and a complaint, and the decision must include information on the data subject's right to have the competent supervisory authority exercised by the data subject. rights in accordance with section 40 (2) of the Act. 10. This follows from section 17 (1) of the Act. 5th
The Audit Corps has stated that the authority has not yet received requests for rectification or deletion under the Law Enforcement Act, and the authority has not applied section 17 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 3, to restrict the processing of information instead of deletion.
The Data Inspectorate must - as before - refer to section 18 (2) of the Danish Civil Procedure Act. 3 and the statutory remarks thereto, cf. above. In addition, the Data Inspectorate must refer to the statutory remarks to section 17 [9] of the Act, which states that in the case of personal data contained in a specific criminal case, for example. the police or prosecutor or in a court of law in a criminal case, correction, etc. of the information is carried out in accordance with the rules of the Administration of Justice Act, cf. the proposal for section 18 (2). 3. It implies that a request for rectification of a judicial decision must be processed under section 221 of the Judicial Code.
4. Deadlines and procedures
This is stated in section 18 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2, that the data controller must respond promptly and in writing to requests as mentioned in this section. If the request is not answered within 4 weeks of receipt, the data controller must inform the person concerned of the reason for this and of when the request is expected to be answered.
The Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has stated that the authority expects to be able to respond to all future requests within the deadline.
Prior to the audit visit, the Audit Corps has provided a process description for requests for access to personal data as well as guidelines for the processing of personal data both inside and outside the criminal justice system, where paragraphs 6.1-6.4 concern the rights of the data subjects. The Template for Responding to Insight Requests, reviewed in section 2.1, is an appendix to the process description for requests for access to personal data.
Both the process description and the description of the data subjects' rights in the guidelines are very generally described, as well as they contain a general reference that the employees can seek help and advice from the Auditor's Data Protection Advisor.
In addition, the Audit Corps has chosen to prepare the guidelines and process description in accordance with both the Data Protection Regulation and the Law Enforcement Act. The merger has meant that the Audit Corps has not explained the difference in the two sets of rules in relation to the disclosure obligation, which has led to an incorrect reproduction of the rules in the Data Protection Regulation. In addition, the Audit Corps' description of the right to rectification, deletion and restriction does not fully comply with the rules.
The Data Inspectorate recommends that the process description and guidelines be elaborated and - where necessary - corrected, so that the employees of the authority are dressed to make the ongoing assessments around this.
5. Conclusion
Following the oversight of the Ministry of Defense's Audit Corps, the Data Inspectorate finds reason to conclude:

That the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has complied with the requirements of section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act.
That notification of the accused in specific military criminal cases must immediately be done in accordance with the rules of the Military Procedure Act and thus not section 13 (1) of the Law Enforcement Act. 2, and that the interaction between the Law Enforcement Act, the Military Procedure Act and the Administration of Justice Act is not entirely clear, which is why the Data Protection Authority has decided to enter into a dialogue with the Ministry of Justice on this.
That the Ministry of Defense Audit Corps has not received any requests for access under section 15 of the Law Enforcement Act or requests for rectification, deletion and restriction of treatment under section 17 of the Law Enforcement Act.

Against this background, the Danish Data Protection Agency considers the audit to be complete and does not take any further action in this regard.

[1] Law No. 410 of April 27, 2017 on law enforcement agencies' processing of personal data with subsequent amendments.
[2] Bill L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on section 13.
[3] Bill L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on section 13.
[4] Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offenses or the enforcement of criminal sanctions and on the free exchange of such information and on the repeal of Council Framework Decision 2008/977 / JHA.
[5] Bill No. L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on Section 18.
[6] Bill No. L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on section 13.
[7] Law No. 531 of 24 June 2005 Military Justice Act with subsequent amendments.
[8] Bill No. L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on section 15.
[9] Bill No. L 168 made on March 28, 2017, the special comments on Section 17.
