GZ: DSB-D123.270 / 0009-DSB / 2018 dated 5.12.2018 [Note editors: names and companies, legal forms and product names, addresses (including URLs, IP and e-mail addresses), file numbers (and the like) , etc., as well as their initials and abbreviations can be abbreviated and / or changed for reasons of pseudonymisation. Obvious spelling, grammar and punctuation errors have been corrected.] COPY LAW The DPA decides on the data protection complaint of Dr. med. Xaver X **** (Complainant) of 27 July 2018 against **** AG (Respondent) for breach of the right to cancellation as follows: - The appeal is dismissed. Legal basis: Art. 2 para. 1, Art. 17 para. 1, Art. 55 para. 1, Art. 57 para. 1 lit. f and Article 77 (1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data Protection Regulation - GDPR), OJ No. L 119 p. 1; Section 24 (1) and (5) of the Data Protection Act (DSG), Federal Law Gazette I No. 165/1999. EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM A. Submissions of the parties and procedure 1. By submission of 27 July 2018, the applicant alleged an infringement of the right to cancellation and brought He submitted an application on 2 July 2018 (and again on 4 July 2018) for the cancellation of all his data to the Respondent. However, the Respondent refused to completely erase his data by letter of 9 July 2018. The entry is accompanied by the correspondence between the complainant and the respondent preceding the complaint procedure before the data protection authority. 2. By comment of 21 August 2018, the Respondent summarized that the data referred to by the complainant was a general on-line advisor inquiry on a motor insurance dated 2 July 2019. Due to the request for cancellation, the Respondent immediately carried out a search in their IT systems in order to be able to clearly identify the person concerned. In this case, the Respondent has lifted two since 2015/2016 canceled contractual relationships to a legal protection and motor insurance on the Respondent. However, the date of birth in the canceled contracts does not match the one announced in the request. For a clear identification, the complainant was requested by letter of 4 July 2019 to send a copy of the ID card, but the complainant had failed to comply with this request. The complainant had suspected that his identity was already sufficiently attributable to the e-mail address of the online mask. In the meantime, the Respondent had restricted the processing of personal data from the complainant's Internet request due to the continuing existence of justified doubts about the clear identity. As a further immediate measure, the ***** AG deleted the personal contact data of the complainant - despite not yet finally clarified identity - for all marketing purposes. Against the background of a lack of contractual relationship, the Respondent had again checked their data and consulted with the responsible client advisor. He confirmed that the complainant in any case agreed with the person who submitted the online application. The Respondent then took further action and either deleted the data that could be clearly attributed to the complainant - depending on the system - immediately, or "anonymised" in accordance with the DSGVO. A traceability to his person is thus irrevocably excluded. This procedure was also clearly permissible within the meaning of Art. 17 GDPR and was to be equated with a deletion. Furthermore, the Respondent - although not required under data protection law - assured the complainant on 2 August 2018 that this anonymous data would be permanently deleted from the systems in the next automatic deletion in March 2019. 3. By letter of 4 September 2018, the complainant replied that he maintained the complaint concerning the alleged infringement. The Respondent is legally wrong if they think that he would not be entitled to a cancellation until the next cancellation period in 2019. Rather, he has a legal right to immediate data deletion due to the omission of the purpose, namely his non-binding request via comparison portal. Citing the Art. 29 Data Protection Working Party, he stated that data destruction would be preferable if it were no longer needed. Data that would not be personal in isolation could potentially be de-anonymised in the context of big data. Consequently, the deletion may not be postponed any longer than absolutely necessary following the request of the person concerned or, if the reason for the cancellation is extant. It was a question of a request for a product of the Respondent on a comparison portal, thus a procedural stage beyond any legal contractual relationship. However, if the Respondent erroneously assumed a "mismatch" of the legacy data and the data of the online request, then it would have had to delete the most recent (supposedly) incorrect personal data on its own initiative. The immediate right to delete exists even without the request of the complainant. 4. At the request of the DPA, the Respondent submitted its anonymization process by submission of 3 October 2018. Thus, in summary, the original customer relationship ("KUV") was removed in the context of the complainant's request by implementing the following combined steps of deletion and anonymisation : 1) Cancellation of the offer: Both the customer request and the offer, which would have been created by the customer management system based on the customer's online information, would have been deleted. 2) Deletion of all electronic contacts (e-mail address, telephone number, etc.) of the customer. 3) Change of the person (name, first name, address): Both name and address were irrevocably manually overwritten by an anonymous, unassignable person (Max Mustermann) with the same gender and date of birth. 4) The now empty content customer connection is only assigned to Max Mustermann. 5) The internal process started automatically with a customer connection was immediately stopped. 6) Consolidation of the person to be deleted to the new anonymous person to ensure that the override is anchored in a technically sustainable manner. 7) Delete the customer in the electronic act (history). Through the implementation of all these described steps, a de facto anonymization of the original customer connection was brought about by overwriting with a "dummy customer connection". There would now be no personal information and therefore no identifying features that could be associated with the customer's original online request. Rather, there would only be a meaningless customer connection to Max Mustermann and thus no further information would be available that would indicate the complainant. The legal anonymization of personal data carried out in this way also corresponds to a permanent deletion, as the data would no longer be personal and thus beyond the scope of the GDPR. 5. The complainant then replicated - according to parties to the findings of the preliminary investigation - in its opinion of 25 October 2018, summarizing that the original alleged infringement (erasure and restriction) would continue to be upheld. The Respondent's "anonymisation procedure" indicated that his claim for cancellation was immediately possible but awaited it until the next deletion period in 2019. The Respondent made an immense effort to escape the final deletion. Nothing had been put forward, so that the final deletion could not be timely. In any case, it can be assumed that there is a primacy of timely, final deletion. The deletion may not be postponed any longer than absolutely necessary upon request or in the case of a reason for cancellation. Thus, it would follow that the deletion only after nine months would legally qualify as delayed. The Opinion is accompanied by an application for limitation of the processing of 4 September 2018 to the Respondent. 6. Following a request from the Data Protection Authority by letter of 7 November 2018 to clarify the process of removal of the personal reference, the Respondent summarized by letter of 16 November 2018 that, in addition to the steps described in the letter of 3 October 2018, the Anonymization by merging the person with an existing sample customer ("dummy") successes. All master data would have been taken over by the sample customer, which would make it impossible to successfully search for the affected person in the systems. In addition, there would be no referenced objects containing data that would allow identification. Furthermore, no personal data would be stored in the log data, since the identification is made exclusively by codes ("ID's"). There, however, the link would have been irreversibly removed. A recovery or reconstruction of the data from the log data is not possible. The Respondent has included screenshots of the work process for technical traceability. 7. The complainant was granted party hearing by a letter dated 21 November 2018 to the DPA. The complainant did not comment. A corresponding forwarding report is enclosed with the file and there is no error message from an e-mail server. B. Object of the complaint On the basis of the complainant's submission, the subject of the complaint is the question whether the Respondent infringed on the complainant in the right of cancellation by completing his request for deletion of 2 July 2018 by making some of his personal data available by anonymisation have been made unrecognizable, so that a reference to his person is no longer possible or only with disproportionate effort. C. Determination of facts 1. The Respondent stores the complainant's personal data in its system. The complainant requested, by letter of 2 July 2018, the deletion of all his data held by the Respondent. By letter dated 9 July 2018, the Respondent stated that all contact details of the complainant stored for marketing purposes had been deleted. The complainant then lodged a complaint with the Data Protection Authority on 27 July 2018 for a breach of the right to erasure. Assessment of evidence: The findings made are based on the complainant's undisputed entry of 27 July 2018 and the attached correspondence between the complainant and the respondent. 2. The Respondent deleted all personal data of the Complainant in its system until the termination of the procedure before the Data Protection Authority by partially removing these data from its system and, in part, irrevocably removing the personal reference of the complainant's data. A reconstruction of the personal reference is - if at all - possible only with disproportionate effort. At the request of the data protection authority, the Respondent set out the process by which the personal reference of the data relating to the appellant was removed. The respondents' comments of 3 October 2018 and 16 November 2018 are based on the findings of fact. Evaluation of Evidence: The findings are based on the Respondent's Compelling Statements of 21 August 2018, 3 October 2018 and 16 November 2018, as well as on the screenshots from the Respondent's workflow. The complainant also did not dispute these findings, but simply stated that primacy of immediate and definitive deletion was to be assumed and that the Respondent had not put forward any argument as to why the final deletion could not be timely. D. From a legal point of view: D.1 The term "anonymisation" As a preliminary point, it should be noted that the binding part of the GDPR does not know the term "anonymisation" used by the respondent. Only in recital 26 is it stated that the GDPR does not apply to anonymised data, which refers to information "which does not refer to an identified or identifiable natural person, or personal data that has been anonymised in such a way that the data subject has been anonymised Person can not or can not be identified ". D.2 Removal of personal reference ("anonymisation") as a means of deletion A definition of the term "deletion of personal data" within the meaning of Article 17 (1) can be found neither in the binding part of the GDPR nor in the recital of the Regulation. Under Article 4 (2), erasure and destruction are cited as alternative forms of processing ('erasure or destruction') which are not necessarily congruent. From this it is clear that a cancellation does not necessarily require a final destruction (see the decision of the former DSK of 26 September 2008, GZ K121.375 / 0012-DSK / 2008, or in relation to Article 2 (b) of Directive 95) / 46 / EC, according to which a distinction has also been made between extinction and destruction, see also Kamann / Braun in Ehmann / Selmayr (ed), Basic Data Protection Regulation [2017] Art. 17, paragraph 32). Such a differentiation also results from the case law of the Constitutional Court (see VfSlg 19.937 / 2014). Therefore, the responsible person has to be considered in terms of means - thus the way of erasure - (see again Kamann / Braun supra, paragraph 36, which refers to the destruction of codes or other decryption facilities without the elimination of the data itself; see also in this sense also autumn in cooling / Buchner (eds), data protection basic regulation [2017] kind 17 Rz 38, after which on the impossibility it is put away, which before in the data to be deleted perceived information to take also see also Nolte / Worker in Gola (ed), Basic Data Protection Regulation [2017], which means deletion of any kind of obfuscation of stored personal data, see also Warter, Dako 2/2018, 39 [40], according to which the result of the deletion act is authoritative ). The removal of the personal reference ("anonymisation") of personal data can thus in principle be a possible means of deletion within the meaning of Art. 4 no. 2 in conjunction with Art. 17 para. 1 DSGVO. However, it must be ensured that neither the person in charge nor a third party can restore a personal reference without disproportionate effort (see RIS-Justiz RS0125838, according to which it is not sufficient to simply change the data organization so that a "targeted access" to the relevant data is excluded, see also the judgment of the ECJ of 19 October 2016, C-582/14, paragraph 45 f). Only if the person in charge aggregates the data in the result on one level, so that no individual events are identifiable, the resulting data can be described as anonymous (ie without personal reference) (see the opinion 5/2014 on anonymization techniques of the former Art , WP216, p. 10). The Administrative Court has also stated - to the extent comparable legal situation under the DSG 2000 - that, for example, a "blackening" can be regarded as a form of cancellation. By disregarding the name of the person concerned as well as all other data relating to his person, his request for cancellation is met (cf the findings of 23 November 2009, Zl. 2008/05/0079). D.3 On the merits In the present case, the Respondent has partially destroyed the complainant's personal data (ie without "leaving behind" anonymised data) and partly "deleted" by removing the personal reference to the complainant. If the complainant submits that the Respondent is required to delete his data immediately and not later than in the next deletion period in March 2019, he must be warned that, due to the removal of the personal reference by the Respondent, the request for deletion must be made before the end of the proceedings before the Data Protection Authority within the meaning of ยง 24 (6) DSG was fully complied with, so that no personal data within the meaning of Art. 2 (1) GDPR are processed and that there is no claim to deletion with regard to a data volume without personal reference (see ErwGr 26 DSGVO). The Respondent also explained the "anonymisation process" comprehensibly with its comments of 3 October 2018 and the supplementary statement of 16 November 2018, so that there are no indications - and otherwise the complainant did not submit - that a personal reference continues to be given The reestablishment of the personal reference is possible without disproportionate effort: For example, it is apparent from these statements, which were based on the findings of fact, that the complainant's personal data were replaced by a "dummy customer". In the next step, this dummy customer was merged with another, non-assignable entry, which means that the change history can no longer be reconstructed sustainably. At the request of the data protection authority, the respondent confirmed that there are no longer any assignable log data. The Respondent has proved this by appropriate screenshots - which were submitted to the complainant. The complainant's argument that "the data could later be" de-anonymised "can not change that. A deletion exists if the processing and use of the personal data of a data subject - as in this case - is no longer possible. The fact that at any time a reconstruction proves to be possible (for example, using new technical aids) makes the "deletion by defacing" not inadequate. Irreversibility is therefore irrespective of the means used for erasure - not necessary (see again the decision of the DSK of 26 September 2008, cited above, see also Kamann / Braun, loc. Cit., Pp. 33) and Haidinger in Knyrim (eds.), DatKomm [2018] Art. 17 no. 63). The complainant is to be followed to the effect that the primacy of the deletion exists, provided that the corresponding requirements of Art. 17 GDPR are met. This follows from Paragraph 4 (2) of the DSG, which provides that the processing of personal data is to be restricted, if data can not be deleted immediately for economic or technical reasons, up to the time at which deletion may take place. However, the complainant fails to recognize that the removal of the personal reference - as stated - already corresponds to a deletion and there is no right of choice of the person concerned with regard to the specific means of deletion. D.4. Assertion of the right of limitation If the complainant submits, on 25 October 2018, that the originally alleged complaint of breach of the right to erasure and restriction continues to be upheld, he fails to acknowledge that by submitting an entry of 27 July 2018 (as well as, moreover, in the request of 2 July 2018 to the Respondent) expressly alleged only an infringement in the right of cancellation and not also in the right of limitation. A potential infringement in the right of restriction would therefore have to be dealt with separately. Result As the Respondent had either destroyed or obscured all of the applicant's personal data in their system prior to completing the present proceedings, it fully complied with the complainant's request for a deletion. The appeal was therefore dismissed in accordance with the claim.
