TO:

Of:

Information Commissioner’s Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

MONETARY PENALTY NOTICE

Smart Home Protection Limited

12/13 Conduit Road, Norton Canes, Cannock, Staffordshire, WS11 9T)

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Smart Home Protection Ltd with a monetary penalty under section 55A
of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”). The penalty is being issued
because of a serious contravention of regulation 21 of the Privacy and
Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (“PECR”)
by Smart Home Protection Ltd.

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.
Legal framework

Smart Home Protection Ltd, whose registered office is given above
(companies house registration number: 06995997), is the person
stated in this notice to have used a public electronic communications
service for the purpose of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of
direct marketing contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 applies to the making of unsolicited calls for direct
marketing purposes. It means that if a company wants to make calls

promoting a product or service to an individual who has a telephone

1
&
] C O 9
Information Commissioner's Office
number which is registered with the Telephone Preference Service Ltd

(“TPS”), then that individual must have given their consent to that

company to receive such calls.
Regulation 21 paragraph (1) of PECR provides that:

“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public
electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls

being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by

2
Information Commissioner’s Office

that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—

(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and
(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

Under section 55A (1) of the DPA (as amended by PECR 2011 and the
Privacy and Electronic Communications (Amendment) Regulations
2015) the Commissioner may serve a person with a monetary penalty

notice if the Commissioner is satisfied that —
a)

1C O.

Information Commissioner's Office
“(a) there has been a serious contravention of the requirements of the

Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations

2003 by the person, and
(b) subsection (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subsection applies if the contravention was deliberate.
(3) This subsection applies if the person —

(a) knew or ought to have known that there was a risk that

the contravention would occur, but

(db) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention.”

10. The Commissioner has issued statutory guidance under section 55C (1)
of the DPA about the issuing of monetary penalties that has been
published on the ICO’s website. The Data Protection (Monetary
Penalties) (Maximum Penalty and Notices) Regulations 2010 prescribe
that the amount of any penalty determined by the Commissioner must
not exceed £500,000.

11. PECR implemented European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed
at the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR were amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches the
PECR regulations so as to give effect to the Directives.
12.

13.

14.

15.

®
1C O oO
Information Commissioner's Office
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR

notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

Background to the case

Smart Home Protection Ltd’s business involves, in part, making
unsolicited marketing calls to subscribers in order to sell its home

security products and services.

Between 10 January 2017 and 24 September 2018, the Commissioner
received 125 complaints about unsolicited direct marketing calls made
by Smart Home Protection Ltd. Of those, 97 complaints were made to
the TPS, with a further 28 made direct to the Commissioner. All of
these complaints were made by individual subscribers who were
registered with the TPS.

The following are examples of the complaints received by the

Commissioner:

e Intro [sic] as Smart Home Protection and said they were following
up on contact a couple of years back. Mentioned the police and
made it sound like it was something to do with them. I asked if it
was insurance and she said no then started the spiel again. I
asked was she selling something and she said yes so I told her I
had never heard of them, and was reg with TPS and would report

them.”

e “A woman claimed that I needed extra home security because the
cuts in police funding meant I am liable to become a victim of

crime.”
16.

17.

Information Commissioner's Office

e “Selling home protection...I told him we were registered with the

TPS service and he said that his info had not flagged that up?!!”

e “Offering to visit me during a forthcoming campaign in the
Colchester area selling some sort of panic alarm. The script was

designed to imply a connection with the police.”

e “Paul talked about rising crime in area and security, but I cut him
short saying a colleague of his called the other day... I said we are

TPS and he should not be calling.”

e “I have physical movement difficulties and I am sick of having to
get up and answer unwanted calls. They are preying on the fears

of criminal activity against people at home.”

On 17 September 2018, the Commissioner wrote to Smart Home
Protection Ltd to explain that she could issue civil monetary penalties
up to £500,000 for PECR breaches. The letter informed Smart Home
Protection Ltd that the Commissioner and the TPS had received
complaints from individual subscribers in relation to unsolicited calls.
Smart Home Protection Ltd was asked a number of questions about its

compliance with PECR.

The Commissioner received a response from Smart Home Protection
Ltd explaining that in 2017 it had invested in a cloud based dialler
system to assist their outgoing telesales. It understood that the dialler
would supress the dialling of TPS listed numbers. This means that the
dialler attempts to dial a number but if the number is TPS registered,
the service provider blocks the call. However, Smart Home Protection

Ltd had not realised that this feature had to be specifically requested
18.

19,

20.

21.

22.

Information Commissioner’s Office

from their service provider, which meant the feature was not enabled

at the time of the contravention.

Smart Home Protection Ltd further explained that it had purchased
data from a third party. It had used that data to call individual
subscribers to market its products and services. It had not screened
the data against the TPS since its purchase it had been assured by its

provider that it was “covered for GDPR so it all good” [sic].

Smart Home Protection Ltd conceded that it conducted no due
diligence when the data was purchased before using it to make
marketing calls. It was unable to ascertain from where the data was
Originally sourced or the basis of the consent relied on. It had no
contract in place with its provider. The particular provider was only
chosen as it was recommended by a colleague but Smart Home
Protection Ltd could provide no details of who made the

recommendation or when.

The Commissioner's investigation revealed that of the calls made by
Smart Home Protection Ltd within the period of 10 February 2017 and
24 September 2018, 118,006 of these were made to numbers which

were registered with the TPS at least 28 days before receiving a call.

The Commissioner has made the above findings of fact on the

balance of probabilities.

The Commissioner has considered whether those facts constitute a
contravention of regulation 21 of PECR by Smart Home Protection Ltd
and, if so, whether the conditions of section 55A DPA are satisfied.
23.

24.

25.

26.

2d

2G.

29.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Smart Home Protection Ltd contravened the

following provisions of PECR:
Smart Home Protection Ltd has contravened regulation 21 of PECR.
The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 10 February 2017 and 24 September 2018 Smart Home
Protection Ltd used a public telecommunications service for the
purpose of making 125 unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes
to subscribers where the number allocated to the subscriber in respect
of the line called was a number listed on the register of numbers kept
by the Commissioner in accordance with regulation 26, contrary to
regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR; and

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to Smart Home Protection Ltd to receive calls.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that Smart Home Protection

Ltd was responsible for this contravention.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the conditions

under section 55A DPA are met.

Seriousness of the contravention
a).

a1.

od.

33:

34.

©
1cO.
Information Commissioner's Office

The Commissioner is satisfied that the contravention identified

above was serious. This is because there have been multiple breaches

of regulation 21 by Smart Home Protection Ltd arising from its

activities over a 21 month period, and this led to a significant number

of complaints about unsolicited direct marketing calls to the TPS and

the Commissioner.

In addition, it is reasonable to suppose that considerably more calls
were made by Smart Home Protection Ltd because those who went to
the trouble to complain are likely to represent only a proportion of
those who actually received calls. Between 10 January 2017 and 24
September 2018 Smart Home Protection Ltd conducted a direct
marketing telephone campaign in respect of which they made 118,006
calls to subscribers without conducting any due diligence on the data

provided to them.

Some individual subscribers have complained that the calls were
misleading because the callers gave the impression that the subscriber
may have been contacted by Smart Home Protection Ltd previously

and agreed at that time to receive further calls in the future.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (a) from
section 55A (1) DPA is met.

Deliberate or negligent contraventions

The Commissioner has considered whether the contravention identified
above was deliberate. In the Commissioner’s view, this means that
Smart Home Protection Ltd’s actions which constituted that

contravention were deliberate actions (even if Smart Home Protection
Su

BO,

Bz

33.

29.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Ltd did not actually intend thereby to contravene PECR).

The Commissioner considers that in this case Smart Home Protection

Ltd did not deliberately contravene regulation 21 of PECR in that sense.

The Commissioner has gone on to consider whether the contravention

identified above was negligent.

First, she has considered whether Smart Home Protection Ltd knew or
ought reasonably to have known that there was a risk that this
contravention would occur. She is satisfied that this condition is met,
given that Smart Home Protection Ltd relied heavily on direct
marketing due to the nature of its business, and the fact that the issue
of unsolicited calls has been widely publicised by the media as being a

problem.

Each time a complaint is made to the TPS, the TPS inform the company
complained about. Smart Home Protection Ltd would therefore have
been aware that complaints were being made by TPS subscribers which
should have prompted them to take steps to investigate the reasons
for this and to address any deficiencies in their practices. The
Commissioner notes that Smart Home Protection Ltd did not respond to

the TPS in relation to any of the complaints.

The Commissioner has also published detailed guidance for companies
carrying out marketing explaining their legal requirements under PECR.
This guidance explains the circumstances under which organisations
are able to carry out marketing over the phone, by text, by email, by
post or by fax. Specifically, it states that live calls must not be made to

subscribers who have told an organisation that they do not want to
40.

41.

42.

43.

Information Commissioner’s Office

receive calls; or to any number registered with the TPS, unless the

subscriber has specifically consented to receive calls.

Finally, the Commissioner has gone on to consider whether Smart
Home Protection Ltd failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the

contravention. Again, she is satisfied that this condition is met.

Organisations buying marketing lists from third parties must make
rigorous checks to satisfy themselves that the third party has obtained
the personal data it is using fairly and lawfully, and that they have, and
can evidence, the necessary consent. It is not acceptable to rely on
assurances of indirect consent without undertaking proper due

diligence. Such due diligence might, for example, include the following:

° How and when was consent obtained?
© Who obtained it and in what context?
° Was the information provided clear and intelligible? How was it

provided — e.g. behind a link, in a footnote, in a pop-up box, ina

clear statement next to the opt-in box?

® Did it specifically mention live calls, texts, e-mails or automated
calls?
° Did it list organisations by name, by description, or was the

consent for disclosure to any third party?

Organisations must ensure that consent was validly obtained, that it
was reasonably recent and that it clearly extended to them specifically

or to organisations fitting their description.

Smart Home Protection Ltd is unable to provide sufficient evidence that
it had undertaken appropriate due diligence in this case. Other
reasonable steps in these circumstances would have included ensuring

that it had in place a contractual arrangement with its third party data

1]
44.

45.

a
1C O.
Information Commissioner’s Office
supplier; confirming that the data was being screened against the TPS

register and ensuring that it had in place an effective and robust

Suppression list.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that Smart Home Protection

Ltd failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that condition (b) from section
55A (1) DPA is met.

The Commissioner’s decision to impose a monetary penalty

46.

47.

48.

49.

For the reasons explained above the Commissioner is satisfied that the
conditions from section 55A(1)DPA have been met in this case. She is

also satisfied that section 55A(3)DPA and the procedural rights under

section 55B have been complied with.

The latter has included the issuing of a Notice of Intent dated 5 April

2019 in which the Commissioner set out her preliminary thinking.

The Commissioner has considered whether, in the circumstances she
should exercise her discretion so as to issue a monetary penalty. In
reaching her final view, the Commissioner has taken into account
representations made by Smart Home Protection Ltd dated 22 April
2019, 2 May 2019 and in other correspondence on this matter,
however there is nothing contained therein to dissuade the

Commissioner from her preliminary view.

The Commissioner is accordingly entitled to issue a monetary penalty

in this case.
50.

51.

52.

53.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

The amount of the penalty

The Commissioner has taken into account the following mitigating

features of this case:

There is no evidence of further complaints having been received in
relation to Smart Home Protection Ltd since it subsequently changed its

data supplier and enabled the TPS screening function on its dialler.

The Commissioner has taken into account the following aggravating

features of this case:

Several of the subscriber complaints indicate that some were
particularly upset by the nature of the calls and the intimation that

they were at an increased risk of being a victim of crime.

The Commissioner’s underlying objective in imposing a monetary
penalty notice is to promote compliance with PECR. The making of
unsolicited direct marketing calls is a matter of significant public
concern. A monetary penalty in this case should act as a general
encouragement towards compliance with the law, or at least as a
deterrent against non-compliance, on the part of all persons running
businesses currently engaging in these practices. This is an opportunity
to reinforce the need for businesses to ensure that they are only

telephoning consumers who want to receive these calls.
Taking into account all of the above, the Commissioner has decided

that the amount of the penalty is £90,000 (Ninety thousand
pounds)

13
54.

95.

56.

57.

58.

59.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

Conclusion

The monetary penalty must be paid to the Commissioner’s office by
BACS transfer or cheque by 12 July 2019 at the latest. The monetary
penalty is not kept by the Commissioner but will be paid into the
Consolidated Fund which is the Government’s general bank account at
the Bank of England.

If the Commissioner receives full payment of the monetary penalty by
11 July 2019 the Commissioner will reduce the monetary penalty by
20% to £72,000 (Seventy two thousand pounds). However, you
should be aware that the early payment discount is not available if you

decide to exercise your right of appeal.

There is a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights)
against:

(a) the imposition of the monetary penalty
and/or;
(b) the amount of the penalty specified in the monetary penalty

notice.

Any notice of appeal should be received by the Tribunal within 28 days
of the date of this monetary penalty notice.

Information about appeals is set out in Annex 1.

The Commissioner will not take action to enforce a monetary penalty

unless:
ee
1C O 2
Information Commissioner's Office
e the period specified within the notice within which a monetary

penalty must be paid has expired and all or any of the monetary

penalty has not been paid;

e all relevant appeals against the monetary penalty notice and any

variation of it have either been decided or withdrawn; and

e the period for appealing against the monetary penalty and any

variation of it has expired.

60. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the monetary penalty is
recoverable by Order of the County Court or the High Court. In
Scotland, the monetary penalty can be enforced in the same manner
as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for execution

issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.

Dated the 11" day of June 2019

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 SAF
ANNEX 1

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

SECTION 55 A-E OF THE DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

ee Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
‘Tribunal’) against the notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a)

b)

that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

a)

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Arnhem House

31 Waterloo Way
Leicester

LE1 8DJ

The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

16
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.

The notice of appeal should state:-

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).