Criptovalute. &quot;With the currency the big names of the web become States-masters&quot; Interview with Antonello Soro, President of the Guarantor for the protection of personal data (by Francesco Lo Dico, &quot;Il Mattino&quot;, 20 June 2019) &quot;The challenge launched by Facebook with the alternative currency is the umpteenth sign of a true democratic emergency linked to the digital society.The giants of the web today have transaction volumes comparable to those of many states, they are on a par with governments, they make agreements with them not only commercial, and now even currency: immense power quotas are gradually passing from states to private subjects: if the sector is not quickly bound to democratic governance principles, we risk handing over a large share of our rights to a handful of digital monarchies , based on the power of data &quot;. The Privacy Guarantor Antonello Soro does not hide his great concern. President, the agreements signed in recent years between some states and giants like Google at Amazon, indicate that the social networks aspire to replace the banks definitively. What types of risks do you see behind this further evolution of social media? &quot;The idea of coining cryptocurrencies and setting up digital banking services is not just the transfer of the logic of disintermediation from the currency world, nor a trivial question of technological evolution. We are in the presence of a question of gigantic power that brings into play themes from the impact devastating political and social. The danger is clear: we are facing a process that can lead to a global, parallel, competitive and tendentially prevailing financial system compared to that regulated by the international authorities.For the great American technological platforms - but not for those Chinese who already enjoyed enormous power - it is the closure of the circle: the power to coin money, symbolic of a sovereign state, giving the web giants unlimited powers &quot;. Traditional banks are subject to strict rules. What are the risks involved in leaving our portfolios to social networks? &quot;Now it will be said that the financial transaction data will remain separate from those that Facebook collects on the social platform, but in reality we already have too many experiences of missed commitments with respect to privacy. For example, the American platform undertook to keep users&#39; social data separate from those collected on Whatsapp, but this did not happen, so to think that this will not happen again this time is therefore completely legitimate, this time with even more worrying consequences for privacy too, the blockchain system is not as safe as it is presented, but highlights indeed many possible problems &quot;. What risks does the possession of such sensitive data entail? &quot;The real point of the matter is that whoever owns the platform in which monetary exchanges take place is the same person who owns the information of billions of people. We are talking about subjects who through that information have developed a growing power of persuasion and prediction and that they could tend to develop a system infected by discrimination geraniums: if a platform decides to exclude a certain subject or a certain category of people from its private payment system, what happens to their rights? Who will protect them? &quot;. What is striking is the great laxity with which many states, European and non-European, have granted social powers such invasive powers. &quot;In effect, governments at the moment appear either powerless or unaware in the face of this transformation process that increases the power of the great oligarchies based on the possession of personal data. of digital society Firstly, just as with material transactions, intangible ones must be governed by principles of transparency and democratic governance &quot;. But Europe has moved in the opposite direction so far. At the beginning of 2018, the PSD2 regulation recognized that digital giants have the possibility of accessing our current accounts to collect payments without intermediaries. &quot;It was a legislation strongly discussed also in our country. But it is in any case a directive that cannot be in contrast with the regulations of the European Union. The European regulation on privacy and the antitrust rules can and must introduce limits. &quot;These individuals with exceptional technological power risk creating enormous asymmetries with respect to the regulated market. As a result, we will have to raise our guard. It is not a problem of the sector, but of a balance of power. The digital society risks creating a real emergency, which calls for causes the future equilibrium of our democracy &quot;.