
Clarification of data liability
Published 12-08-2019
Decision
Public authorities
The University of Copenhagen is responsible for the processing of personal data carried out by medical students who, in internships, record their own consultations with a view to fulfilling their obligations for, respectively. teaching and exam at the University of Copenhagen. Summary
In a case where a medical student was stolen by a video camera owned by the University of Copenhagen, the Data Inspectorate has taken a position on data responsibility when a medical student is in an internship.
On June 1, 2018, the Danish Data Protection Agency received a notification from Doctors Old Strandvej about a breach of personal data security. The report showed that on May 25, 2018, a medical student from the University of Copenhagen - in connection with a 4 week internship at Doctors Gammel Strandvej - was stolen a video camera with recordings of patients for examination at the University of Copenhagen. The camera was owned by the University of Copenhagen.
Subsequently, on behalf of Doctors Gammel Strandvej, Bruun Hjejle claimed that Doctors Gammel Strandvej was not responsible for the personal data processing in question, and instead stated the University of Copenhagen as a possible data controller. Against this background, the Data Inspectorate requested a statement from the University of Copenhagen.
In its decision, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that it is the University of Copenhagen that has established the scheme and rules for traineeships for the course in general medicine. The course is part of the subject of the medical student at the University of Copenhagen, and it is thus the University of Copenhagen who decides for what purposes and with what tools that personal data may be processed.
When the Data Inspectorate found that the University of Copenhagen is responsible for the data processing in question, it is the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Authority that - by 1) having lost a camcorder containing information on an unknown number of data subjects, including information on health, 2) not to have reported the breach of the personal data security to the Data Protection Authority and 3) not to notify the registered persons covered by the breach of the personal data security has not complied with the requirements of Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. Article 33 (1) 1 and Article 34 (1). First
Against this background, the Data Inspectorate has made serious criticism that the University of Copenhagen's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation. The Data Inspectorate has noted that the University of Copenhagen was of the opinion that the student was responsible for the data processing in question, which is why the University of Copenhagen did not act in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. Article 33 (1) 1 and Article 34 (1). First
Decision
First
The Danish Data Protection Authority hereby returns to the case, where on 1 June 2018, the Danish Data Protection Agency received a notification from Doctors Gammel Strandvej about a breach of the personal data security.
Following a review of the case, it is the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, including in particular the University of Copenhagen's statements of April 3 and May 6, 2019, that the University of Copenhagen is responsible for the processing of personal data carried out by the medical student during the internship at Doctors Gammel Strandvej.
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds a basis for expressing serious criticism that the University of Copenhagen's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation.
The following is a detailed examination of the case and a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. Case making
On June 1, 2018, the Data Inspectorate received a notification from Doctors Old Strandvej about a breach of personal data security.
According to the report, on May 25, 2018, a medical student from the University of Copenhagen - in connection with a 4 week internship at Doctors Gammel Strandvej - was stolen a video camera with recordings of patients for exams at the University of Copenhagen. The camera is owned by the University of Copenhagen.
By letter dated August 9, 2018, the Data Inspectorate requested Doctors Old Strandvej for an opinion on the matter. By letter of September 12, 2018, Bruun & Hjejle, on behalf of Doctors Gammel Strandvej, made an opinion on the matter.
In the statement, Bruun & Hjejle argued that the doctors Gammel Strandvej are not responsible for the data processing of personal data. At the same time, Bruun & Hjejle made a bid as to who could be the data controller for the processing in question, and in this connection stated the University of Copenhagen as a possible data controller.
By letter dated March 13, 2019, the Data Inspectorate of the University of Copenhagen requested an opinion on the matter. By letter of April 3, 2019, the University of Copenhagen made a statement on the matter.
By letter of 16 April 2019, the Data Inspectorate at the new University of Copenhagen requested an opinion on the matter. In this connection, the Data Inspectorate requested the University of Copenhagen to complete the questionnaire attached by letter of 13 March 2019. In addition, the Data Inspectorate of the University of Copenhagen requested a statement of the considerations and criteria that the University of Copenhagen has included in the risk-based approach to processing security, as referred to in Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, expresses.
By letter of 6 May 2019, the University of Copenhagen presented a renewed opinion on the matter.
2.1. The University of Copenhagen's remarks
The University of Copenhagen has stated in its opinion to the Data Inspectorate of April 2, 2019 that the student is responsible for the processing of personal data that is carried out as part of the participation in courses at the University of Copenhagen, since the students themselves "decide for what purposes and the means by which personal data may be processed ', cf. the definition of the concept of data controller in Article 4 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, No. 7.
The University of Copenhagen has stated that the Executive Order on Education, Executive Order no. 1328 of 15 January 2016 on Bachelor's and Master's programs at the universities, lays down detailed rules on the purpose and organization of the programs. Section 33 of the Executive Order authorizes universities to set rules for individual programs. In accordance with section 33 of the Executive Order, the University of Copenhagen has established curricula for the programs offered by the university. The curriculum does not regulate the purpose of the concrete collection of information that the students make as part of the participation in the course.
The University of Copenhagen has also stated that, according to section 33, the university lays down rules for internships in the curricula for the individual programs, which stipulate rules for the course in general medicine, which includes an internship course. This describes the overall purpose of the course and the internship. In addition, general guidelines are given for the implementation of the internship course in the form of, for example, "Course Booklet Spring 2018" regarding the Clinical Course in General Medicine.
The University of Copenhagen guides the student in connection with the completion of the program, cf. Section 9 of the University Act. The guidelines do not mean that the University of Copenhagen "determines" the purpose of the students' collection of personal data. The University of Copenhagen does not have the same instructional powers for the students as for the university staff.
In connection with the health science and health education programs, it is stated in section 41 (1) of the Health Act. 2, no. 7, that health professionals may disclose information about patients without the patient's consent to "a student who, as part of a health science or health education, participates in the treatment of a patient without being assisted". The University of Copenhagen has stated that if the university was responsible for the data, the provision would not give access to a transfer of data to the student.
The University of Copenhagen has stated that the University - in connection with the students' bachelor projects or master's theses - only approves the student's subject definition or assignment form, the University's approval and subsequent guidance is only a support to the student.
The University of Copenhagen further states that the fact that the university has lent a camera to the student cannot cause the university to be responsible for the video material that the student stores on the camera. The University points out that the "aids" can be delegated by a data controller for technical or organizational issues during a processing. The lending scheme is established to support the safe collection and storage of patient data, cf. Article 32 of the Regulation. The lending scheme can therefore be regarded as a delegation of choice of resources as described in the Article 29 Working Party's opinion of 16 February 2010.
In connection with the Danish Data Protection Agency's question about the extent and how the University of Copenhagen makes students aware of their responsibility when processing personal data, the University has stated that information on the handling of personal data in connection with the study is available on the education pages. Information about personal data is also available in the teaching on the university's teaching portal targeted at the teachers. In connection with the university's strategy 2023, the university has launched a project on "Common goals at the University for the digitization of education". One of the initiatives has a special focus on “digital education of students”, and aims among other things. on the preparation of additional information material for students on the personal data rules and information security.
The University of Copenhagen also states that when the Personal Data Act was in force, student processing of personal data was covered by the Exemption Ordinance, Executive Order No. 410 of 9 May 2012 amending the Executive Order on the exemption from the obligation to notify certain treatments that are done for a private data controller . The Exemption Ordinance provided for exceptions to the notification requirement for private data controllers in accordance with section 48 of the Personal Data Act. When students were covered by the Exemption Ordinance, this must mean that students are regarded as private data controllers in accordance with the rules of the Personal Data Act. The Data Inspectorate's previous guidance on the Personal Data Act did not indicate that students could not be responsible for data. Since the definition of a "data controller" has not changed, it must be assumed that the interpretation of the term in relation to students, which could be deduced from the exemption order, can be continued in relation to the corresponding concept in the Data Protection Regulation.
The University of Copenhagen, in its most recent statement to the Data Inspectorate of May 6, 2019, generally stated that the University of Copenhagen until April 16, 2019 assumed that the student was responsible for the processing of personal data carried out by the medical student. Consequently, it was not possible for the University of Copenhagen to explain the considerations and criteria that the University of Copenhagen has included in the risk-based approach to treatment safety, as the University did not consider itself a data controller at the time of the incident and therefore did not carry out a risk assessment in connection with with the student's activities.
The University of Copenhagen has stated that if the University of Copenhagen is regarded as a data controller, it seems problematic that the University is responsible for activities carried out by persons who are not subject to the University's instructional powers. The University of Copenhagen has stated that no data processing agreement has been concluded with the students who took the course in general medicine, since the University of Copenhagen has considered the student to be a data controller.
Regarding the specific incident, the University of Copenhagen has stated that the student obtains the patient's oral and written consent to participate in a video. The instruction for the student appears in the course booklet of the University of Copenhagen, and it is pointed out at the introductory lecture that the course booklet must be read and that confidentiality and security must be taken seriously. The course booklet informs the student that
“You have to exercise extreme caution and care with the video footage. Take care of the camera and SD card. Only show the video to those who meet the requirements of paragraph 1. (Note: It follows that the video portion of the exam is not public, even though exams at the University of Copenhagen are public.) We advise against copying the videos to your computer, if you do, you are responsible for the copy being deleted. "
The admission does not include name or social security number and is kept with the student for the holding of exams (maximum 5 weeks). After graduation, admission to the university is kept for 14 days after the examination for reasons of examination deadline.
The University of Copenhagen further stated that the University was informed of the breach of the student's personal data security by email of May 25, 2018, the same day the camera was stolen. The University of Copenhagen was informed that there was a video with a number of patients, but not about the identity or details of the patients concerned. No conversation was held with the student.
In addition, the University of Copenhagen states that the persons concerned have not been notified, as the University has assessed that the theft was not directed at personal data and that the likelihood of abuse was infinitely small. People are not likely to be identified based on video footage, and there is no risk of identity theft as neither name nor social security number appears. In this connection, the University of Copenhagen states that no measures have been taken to limit the damage suffered by the data subjects in the breach of personal data security, as the University of Copenhagen is not aware of or able to foresee what damage the data subjects have suffered. .
Finally, the University of Copenhagen has stated that the university has not experienced similar breaches of personal data security since the course took its present form in 1993.
3. Relevant legal rules
The Danish Data Protection Agency may, for information on the Data Protection Regulation [1], state that, in accordance with Article 2 (2) of the Regulation, 2. Paragraph 1 shall apply to the processing of personal data which is wholly or partially processed by means of automatic data processing and to other non-automatic processing of personal data which is or will be contained in a register.
The Data Inspectorate may further state that a data controller, in accordance with Article 4 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 7. Paragraph 1 (7) shall be understood as a natural or legal person, public authority, institution or other body which, alone or together with others, decides for what purposes and aids may be made to process personal data; if the purposes and aids of such processing are laid down in EU or national law, the data controller or the specific criteria for its designation may be established in EU or national law.
A data processor shall, in accordance with Article 4 (2). Paragraph 1 (8) is understood as a natural or legal person, public authority, institution or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the data controller […]
Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation Paragraph 1 states that, taking into account the current technical level, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, coherence and purpose of the processing, and the risks of varying probabilities and seriousness of the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the data controller undertakes appropriate technical and organizational measures to: ensure a level of security appropriate to these risks.
Article 32 (2) of the Regulation Paragraph 2 states that the assessment of the appropriate level of security takes into account, in particular, the risks posed by processing, in particular through accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorized disclosure or access to personal data transmitted. , stored or otherwise processed.
It follows from Article 33 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1, that the breach of personal data security shall be reported by the data controller without undue delay and, if possible, within 72 hours after it has become aware of the breach of the personal data security, to the supervisory authority competent in accordance with Article 55, unless it is unlikely , that the breach of personal data security involves a risk to the rights or freedoms of individuals. If the notification to the supervisory authority is not made within 72 hours, it shall be accompanied by a reason for the delay.
In addition, Article 34 of the Regulation states that where a breach of personal data security is likely to pose a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the data controller informs the data subject of the breach of the personal data security without undue delay.
4. Opinion of the Data Inspectorate
4.1. data Responsibility
It is the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency that the University of Copenhagen is responsible for the data processing of personal data that has been carried out by the medical student in the internship at Doctors Gammel Strandvej.
The Data Inspectorate has emphasized that the purpose of recording the consultations is that the student can use the recordings to fulfill his or her obligations to the students. teaching and exam at the University of Copenhagen.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that, in accordance with section 33 of the Executive Order on Education, it follows from the course booklet "Spring 2018 for the Clinical Course in General Medicine" that it is the University of Copenhagen that has established the scheme and rules for traineeships for the course in general medicine. . The course is part of the subject of the medical student at the University of Copenhagen, and it is thus the University of Copenhagen who decides for what purposes and with what tools that personal data may be processed. The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that the instruction for the student appears in the course booklet, and it is pointed out by the University of Copenhagen at the introductory lecture that the course booklet must be read.
Finally, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that there is no disclosure of information where section 41 (1) of the Health Act. 2, point 7, applies, and that the processing current for the security breach can be isolated for processing in the form of recording and storing personal data on a video camera owned by the University of Copenhagen for the purpose of the student's obligations for, respectively. teaching and exam at the University of Copenhagen. In this connection, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that the University of Copenhagen's "Cooperation and Confidentiality Agreement" states that personal data for the project may only be stored and processed on computers and other research equipment belonging to the University of Copenhagen.
The Data Inspectorate has noted that the University of Copenhagen has not taken a position on the risks involved in the processing of personal data for the data subjects, as it has so far been the University of Copenhagen's assessment that the individual student was responsible for the processing of personal data carried out. of the medical student in the internship.
However, as stated above, it is the Danish Data Protection Agency's assessment that the University of Copenhagen is responsible for the data processing of personal data carried out by medical students in internships.
The Data Inspectorate must therefore recommend that the University of Copenhagen assess the risks that the processing entails for the data subject, as this is in the opinion of the Data Protection Authority a prerequisite for implementing appropriate technical and organizational measures pursuant to Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
4.2. Security of processing
The Data Inspectorate finds that the retention of admissions to patients is a processing of personal data covered by Article 2 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
The Data Inspectorate hereby emphasizes that the information in question, notwithstanding that neither name nor social security number appears, is sufficiently specific to identify a person, and thus it also appears to unauthorized persons as information about a specific natural person, cf. Judgment of the European Court of Justice C-434/16, paragraph 35.
It is the opinion of the Danish Data Protection Agency that personal data in connection with medical consultations constitute personal data on health covered by the special categories of personal data, in accordance with Article 9 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
Following a review of the case, including the fact that the University of Copenhagen is responsible for the processing of personal data, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that the University of Copenhagen - having lost a camcorder containing information on an unknown number of data subjects, including information on health - has not lived up to the requirement to implement appropriate security measures in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation; First
In this connection, the Data Inspectorate is of the opinion that the University of Copenhagen should have established measures to safeguard the information in question against being made known to unauthorized persons, eg. through encryption of the storage medium (SD card), separate storage of the storage medium separate from the camera or similar measures to make the information inaccessible to unauthorized persons.
In addition, the Data Inspectorate has emphasized that the recordings were made in connection with medical consultations, which is why the breach of personal data security deals with health information. Therefore, there is a high risk of persons' rights or freedoms, since exposure of the recordings may result in a violation of the integrity of the persons concerned, and it may also have social consequences for the data subjects.
After a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate further finds that the University of Copenhagen - by not reporting the breach of the personal data security to the Data Inspectorate - has not complied with the requirement to report breaches of the personal data security without undue delay and, if possible, within 72 hours after the data controller has become aware of the breach pursuant to Article 33 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
In addition, following a review of the case, the Data Inspectorate finds that the University of Copenhagen - by not informing the registered persons covered by the breach of the personal data security - has not acted in accordance with Article 34 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. First
Against this background, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is serious criticism that the University of Copenhagen's processing of personal data has not taken place in accordance with the Data Protection Regulation.
The Data Inspectorate has also emphasized that the University of Copenhagen was informed of the breach of personal data security on 25 May 2018, when the breach occurred, but subsequently did not take any further action.
The Data Inspectorate does not find that the University of Copenhagen stated that the theft was not aimed at personal data and that the University of Copenhagen is not aware of or able to predict what damage the data subjects suffered, too relevant to the case.
The Data Inspectorate has noted that the University of Copenhagen was of the opinion that the student was responsible for the data processing in question, which is why the University of Copenhagen did not act in accordance with Article 32 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. Article 33 (1) 1 and Article 34 (1). First
5. Concluding remarks
In view of the nature of the case, the Data Inspectorate must state that the University of Copenhagen is not required to make a separate notification of the breach of personal data security, cf. Article 33 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 1. In this connection, the Data Inspectorate emphasized that the breach was sufficiently illuminated in connection with the examination of the case and that the University of Copenhagen has, moreover, acknowledged the proceedings.
The Data Inspectorate regrets the long case processing time, which is due to a great deal of busyness in the audit, and the audit regrets that the University of Copenhagen has not been regularly informed of delays in the case processing time, etc.
A copy of this letter is sent today to Bruun Hjejle for information.

[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
