To:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

Alistar Green Legal Services Limited

Suite 1, Goodlass Road, Goodlass House, Liverpool, L24 9HJ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Alistar Green Legal Services Limited (“Alistair Green”) with an
enforcement notice under section 40 of the Data Protection Act 1998
(“DPA”). The notice is in relation to a contravention of Regulation 21 of
the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations
2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

Alistar Green, whose registered office is given above (companies house
registration number: 10423973), is the person stated in this notice to
have used a public electronic communications service for the purpose
of making unsolicited calls for the purposes of direct marketing

contrary to regulation 21 of PECR.

Regulation 21 of PECR states:
oO

1C O.

Information Commissioner’s Office
“(1) A person shall neither use, nor instigate the use of, a public

electronic communications service for the purposes of making

unsolicited calls for direct marketing purposes where-

(a) the called line is that of a subscriber who has previously
notified the caller that such calls should not for the time being

be made on that line; or

(b) the number allocated to a subscriber in respect of the called

line is one listed in the register kept under regulation 26.”
Regulation 21 paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and (5) provide that:

“(2) A subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention

of paragraph (1).

(3) A person shall not be held to have contravened paragraph (1)(b)
where the number allocated to the called line has been listed on the
register for less than 28 days preceding that on which the call is

made.

(4) Where a subscriber who has caused a number allocated to a line of
his to be listed in the register kept under regulation 26 has notified
a caller that he does not, for the time being, object to such calls
being made on that line by that caller, such calls may be made by
that caller on that line, notwithstanding that the number allocated

to that line is listed in the said register.

(5) Where a subscriber has given a caller notification pursuant to

paragraph (4) in relation to a line of his—
@
1C O ®
Information Commissioner's Office
(a) the subscriber shall be free to withdraw that notification at any
time, and

(b) where such notification is withdrawn, the caller shall not make such

calls on that line.”

Under regulation 26 of PECR, the Commissioner is required to maintain
a register of numbers allocated to subscribers who have notified them
that they do not wish, for the time being, to receive unsolicited calls for
direct marketing purposes on those lines. The Telephone Preference
Service Limited (“TPS”) is a limited company set up by the
Commissioner to carry out this role. Businesses who wish to carry out
direct marketing by telephone can subscribe to the TPS for a fee and

receive from them monthly a list of numbers on that register.

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines direct marketing as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

The DPA contains enforcement provisions at Part V which are
exercisable by the Commissioner. Those provisions are modified and
extended for the purposes of PECR by Schedule 1 PECR.

Section 40(1)(a) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR)
provides that if the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has
contravened or is contravening any of the requirements of the
Regulations, he may serve him with an Enforcement Notice requiring
him to take within such time as may be specified in the Notice, or to
refrain from taking after such time as may be so specified, such steps

as are so specified.
10.

11.

Les

13.

14.

15.

@
1C O O
Information Commissioner's Office
The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR

notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that Alistar Green has contravened regulation
21 of PECR.

The Commissioner finds that the contravention was as follows:

Between 13 March 2017 and 18 July 2017 Alistar Green used a public
telecommunications service for the purpose of making 213 unsolicited
calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the number

allocated to the subscriber in respect of the line called was a number
listed on the register of numbers kept by the Commissioner in

accordance with regulation 26, contrary to regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

The Commissioner is also satisfied for the purposes of regulation 21
that these calls were made to subscribers who had registered with the
TPS at least 28 days prior to receiving the calls and had not given their

prior consent to Alistar Green to receive calls.

The Commissioner has considered, as she is required to do under
section 40(2) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR) when
deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice, whether any
contravention has caused or is likely to cause any person damage. The
Commissioner has decided that it is unlikely that actual damage has

been caused in this instance.
@
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
16. In view of the matters referred to above, the Commissioner hereby
gives notice that, in exercise of her powers under section 40 of the Act,

she requires that Alistar Green shall within 35 days of the date of this

notice:

Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraphs (3) & (4)
of regulation 21 of PECR, neither make, nor instigate unsolicited
calls for direct marketing purposes to subscribers where the
number allocated to the subscriber in respect of the called line
was a number listed on the register of numbers kept by the
Commissioner in accordance with regulation 26, contrary to
regulation 21(1)(b) of PECR.

17. There is a right of appeal against this Notice to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights), part of the General Regulatory Chamber.

Information about appeals is set out in the attached Annex 1.

18. Any Notice of Appeal should be sent so that it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date on which this Notice is sent.

Dated the 30" day of January 2019.

 
   

Signed

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 5AF
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office
ANNEX 1

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

Le Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom an enforcement notice has been served a right of appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the ‘Tribunal’) against the
notice.

2. If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers: -

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3s You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.
1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

The notice of appeal should state: -

a)

b)
C)
d)
e)
f)

g)

n)

your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);

an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
the name and address of the Information Commissioner;
details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

the result that you are seeking;

the grounds on which you rely;

you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).