TO:

Of:

ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

Eldon Insurance Services Limited (trading as GoSkippy Insurance)

Lysander House (2" floor), Catbrain Lane, Cribbs Causeway, Bristol
BS10 7TQ

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has decided to issue
Eldon Insurance Services Limited [T/A GoSkippy Insurance] (referred
to hereafter as “GoSkippy” for the purposes of this notice) with an
enforcement notice under section 40 of the Data Protection Act 1998
(“DPA”). The notice is in relation to a contravention of Regulation 22 of
the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations
2003 (“PECR”).

This notice explains the Commissioner’s decision.

Legal framework

GoSkippy, whose registered office is given above (Company House
Reference: 06334001), is the organisation stated in this notice to have
instigated the transmission of unsolicited communications by means of
electronic mail to individual subscribers for the purposes of direct

marketing contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

4. Regulation 22 of PECR states:

“(1) This regulation applies to the transmission of unsolicited
communications by means of electronic mail to individual

subscribers.

(2) Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3), a person
shall neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of, unsolicited
communications for the purposes of direct marketing by means of
electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified the sender that he consents for the time being
to such communications being sent by, or at the instigation of, the

sender.

(3) A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for

the purposes of direct marketing where—

(a) that person has obtained the contact details of the recipient
of that electronic mail in the course of the sale or
negotiations for the sale of a product or service to that

recipient;

(b) the direct marketing is in respect of that person’s similar

products and services only; and

(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing
(free of charge except for the costs of the transmission of
the refusal) the use of his contact details for the purposes
of such direct marketing, at the time that the details were
initially collected, and, where he did not initially refuse the
use of the details, at the time of each subsequent

communication.

(4) A-subscriber shall not permit his line to be used in contravention of

paragraph (2).”
10.

11.

1CO.

Information Commissioner's Office

Section 11(3) of the DPA defines “direct marketing” as “the
communication (by whatever means) of any advertising or marketing
material which is directed to particular individuals”. This definition also

applies for the purposes of PECR (see regulation 2(2)).

“Individual” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a living individual

and includes an unincorporated body of such individuals”.

“Electronic mail’ is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “any text,
voice, sound or image message sent over a public electronic
communications network which can be stored in the network or in the
recipient’s terminal equipment until it is collected by the recipient and

includes messages sent using a short message service”.

A “subscriber” is defined in regulation 2(1) of PECR as “a person who is
a party to a contract with a provider of public electronic

communications services for the supply of such services”.

PECR implements European legislation (Directive 2002/58/EC) aimed at
the protection of the individual’s fundamental right to privacy in the
electronic communications sector. PECR was amended for the purpose
of giving effect to Directive 2009/136/EC which amended and
strengthened the 2002 provisions. The Commissioner approaches PECR

so as to give effect to the Directives.

The DPA contains enforcement provisions at Part V which are
exercisable by the Commissioner. Those provisions are modified and
extended for the purposes of PECR by Schedule 1 PECR.

Section 40(1)(a) of the DPA (as extended and modified by PECR)

provides that if the Commissioner is satisfied that a person has

3
12.

LS.

14.

15.

16,

®
1C QO.
Information Commissioner's Office
contravened or is contravening any of the requirements of the
Regulations, he may serve him with an Enforcement Notice requiring
him to take within such time as may be specified in the Notice, or to

refrain from taking after such time as may be so specified, such steps

as are so specified.

The provisions of the DPA remain in force for the purposes of PECR
notwithstanding the introduction of the Data Protection Act 2018 (see
paragraph 58(1) of Part 9, Schedule 20 of that Act).

The contravention

The Commissioner finds that on 23 August 2016, and between the
dates of 25 February 2017 and 31 July 2017, GoSkippy instigated the
transmission of 1,069,852 direct marketing emails to Leave.EU Group

Limited (“Leave.EU”) subscribers contrary to regulation 22 of PECR.

Section 11(3) DPA definition of direct marketing covers any advertising
or marketing material, and applies to messages which contain even

some marketing elements, even if that is not their main purpose.

In this instance, the Commissioner considers that Leave.EU is the
sender of the emails; and indeed Leave.EU has not challenged that
conclusion. Although Leave.EU (and GoSkippy) assert that Leave.EU
was also the instigator of the emails, the Commissioner is not content

to accept that assertion in this context.

The Commissioner accepts that the primary reason for the messages
(save for that sent on 23 August 2016) being sent was in furtherance
of Leave.EU’s political campaigning activities. However, the particular

form of these messages — as opposed to various other messages sent
Live

18.

19.

ie)
ICO.
Information Commissioner's Office

by Leave.EU —- included direct marketing on behalf of GoSkippy.

GoSkippy accepts that it created the advertising material for inclusion

in the emails. GoSkippy provided - only in response to the Notice of

Intent — a single email from August 2016 (and therefore, at best, only

relevant to the single email sent on 23 August 2016 and not to the 20

emails sent from 25 February 2017) which purported to indicate that

the request for such marketing material had emanated from Leave.EU.

The Commissioner does not consider this clear evidence in favour of

GoSkippy, and she notes that the individual in question was seconded

from GoSkippy. The email does not address how the request came

about, and it does not address the later 2017 emails at all. What it

shows is GoSkippy working closely with Leave.EU to ensure that its

own marketing - from which it, not Leave.EU, would benefit - was to

be included in Leave.EU’s emails. The Commissioner does not consider

that the absence of a contractual arrangement assists GoSkippy; on

the contrary, it is indicative of a more informal, blurred, arrangement

whereby GoSkippy was able to instigate the inclusion of its own

marketing material as it wished.

As an instigator of direct marketing communications, it is incumbent on
GoSkippy, to ensure that it is compliant with the requirements of
regulation 22 of PECR, and to ensure that valid consent to send those

messages and the marketing within them had been acquired.

“Consent” within the meaning of regulation 22(2) requires that the
recipient of the electronic mail has notified the sender that he consents
to messages being sent by, or at the instigation of, that sender.
Indirect, or third party, consent can be valid but only if it is clear and

specific enough.

The Commissioner’s direct marketing guidance says “organisations

need to be aware that indirect consent will not be enough for texts,
20.

21s

22.

23.

24.

8
Information Commissioner's Office
emails or automated calls. This is because the rules on electronic

marketing are stricter, to reflect the more intrusive nature of electronic

messages.”

It goes on to say that indirect consent can be valid but only if it is clear
and specific enough. Moreover, “the customer must have anticipated
that their details would be passed to the organisation in question, and
that they were consenting to messages from that organisation. This will

depend on what exactly they were told when consent was obtained”.

Consent will not be “informed” if individuals do not understand what
they are consenting to. Organisations should therefore always ensure
that the language used is clear, easy to understand, and not hidden
away in a privacy policy or small print. Consent will not be valid if
individuals are asked to agree to receive marketing from “similar
organisations”, “partners”, “selected third parties” or other similar

generic description.

The Commissioner understands that GoSkippy only received an
assurance from Leave.EU that marketing would be sent only to those

who had consented to receive its communications.

Since it does not appear that GoSkippy have had a prior relationship
with the subscribers who received marketing for their products, they
would not be able to rely on the ‘soft opt-in’ exception provided under
regulation 22(3) of PECR.

Furthermore, having reviewed the Privacy Policy relied upon by
Leave.EU, it is clear to the Commissioner that GoSkippy are not
specifically named, or identified in such a way that would suggest they
could lawfully instigate direct marketing to subscribers. The

Commissioner does not consider that a subscriber to political emails
2s

26.

ZF,

28.

1CO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

from Leave.EU can be taken to have consented to receiving marketing
on behalf of an insurance company such as GoSkippy. There would
need to be clear and specific evidence of such consent, whether direct

or indirect. There is not.

The Commissioner is therefore satisfied that GoSkippy did not have the
necessary valid consent for the 1,069,852 direct marketing emails for

which it instigated transmission to subscribers.

The Commissioner has considered, as she is required to do under
section 40(2) of the DPA (as extended and modified by the
Regulations) when deciding whether to serve an Enforcement Notice,
whether any contravention has caused or is likely to cause any person
damage. The Commissioner has decided that it is unlikely that actual

damage has been caused in this instance.

In view of the matters referred to above the Commissioner
hereby gives notice that, in exercise of her powers under
section 40 of the DPA, she requires that GoSkippy shall within
30 days of the date of this Notice:

Except in the circumstances referred to in paragraph (3) of regulation
22 of PECR, neither transmit, nor instigate the transmission of,
unsolicited communications for the purposes of direct marketing by
means of electronic mail unless the recipient of the electronic mail has
previously notified GoSkippy that he clearly and specially consents for
the time being to such communications being sent by, or at the

instigation of GoSkippy

There is a right of appeal against this Notice to the First-tier Tribunal
(Information Rights), part of the General Regulatory Chamber.

Information about appeals is set out in the attached Annex 1.

7
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

29. Any Notice of Appeal should be sent so that it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date on which this Notice is sent

Dated the 15* day of February 2019

Signed:

 

Stephen Eckersley

Director of Investigations
Information Commissioner’s Office
Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow

Cheshire

SK9 SAF
ICO.

Information Commissioner’s Office

ANNEX 1

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER

1. Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person upon
whom a monetary penalty notice or variation notice has been served a
right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) the
“Tribunal”) against the notice.

2: If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is not in
accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of discretion by
the Commissioner, that she ought to have exercised her
discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other decision as
could have been made by the Commissioner. In any other case the
Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3. You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the Tribunal
at the following address:

General Regulatory Chamber
HM Courts & Tribunals Service
PO Box 9300

Leicester

LE1 8DJ

a) The notice of appeal should be sent so it is received by the
Tribunal within 28 days of the date of the notice.

b) If your notice of appeal is late the Tribunal will not admit it
unless the Tribunal has extended the time for complying with this
rule.

4. The notice of appeal should state: -

a) your name and address/name and address of your representative
(if any);
ICO.

Information Commissioner's Office

b) an address where documents may be sent or delivered to you;
Cc) the name and address of the Information Commissioner;

d) details of the decision to which the proceedings relate;

e) the result that you are seeking;

f) the grounds on which you rely;

g) you must provide with the notice of appeal a copy of the
monetary penalty notice or variation notice;

h) if you have exceeded the time limit mentioned above the notice
of appeal must include a request for an extension of time and the
reason why the notice of appeal was not provided in time.

Before deciding whether or not to appeal you may wish to consult your
solicitor or another adviser. At the hearing of an appeal a party may
conduct his case himself or may be represented by any person whom
he may appoint for that purpose.

The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
(General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in sections 48 and 49 of,
and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection Act 1998, and Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General Regulatory Chamber) Rules
2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1976 (L.20)).