For information on how we process

e personal data visit www.ico.org.uk/privacy-notice
1C O Wycliffe House, Water Lane, Wilmslow, Cheshire, SK9 SAF
@ T. 0303 123 1113 F. 01625 524510

Information Commissioner's Office www.ico.org.u k

DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998

SUPERVISORY POWERS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER

TO:
Of:

ENFORCEMENT NOTICE

DATED: 9 August 2019

Hudson Bay Finance Limited

Unit 10 Stadium Road
Stadium Court

Wirral

Merseyside

CH62 3RP

Hudson Bay Finance Limited is a “data controller” as defined in
section 1(1) of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“DPA”).

Section 4(4) of the DPA provides that, subject to section 27(1), it is
the duty of a data controller to comply with the data protection
principles in relation to all personal data with respect to which it is

the data controller.

The Information Commissioner (“Commissioner”) has considered a

request for assessment made under section 42 of the DPA by S|

eee

complainant”).

The request for assessment concerned the failure by the data
controller to supply personal data requested by way of a subject
access request made by the complainant in writing by recorded

delivery on 18 May 2018 and signed for on 21 May 2018 (copy
FSC

Mixed Sources
Pranfipct qpruinige Frigien well marin yet
fonosts, cuniro |jecd anu
1 recycled wood or fiber
Cert no, TT-COC-002272

www.fsc or;
©1996 Forest Stewardship Council
Information Commissioner’s Office

attached) in compliance with the requirements of section 7 of the
DPA.

5. Having received no response to her subject access request the
complainant contacted the Commissioner on 21 September 2018

regarding the data controller’s failure to respond.

6, The Commissioner wrote to the data controller on 11 December
2018 to ask it to review the complainant’s subject access request
and to provide a response. This letter was returned and was
subsequently resent to the data controller on 17 January 2019

(copies enclosed).

7. The complainant still didn’t receive a response to her subject access
request and so the Commissioner telephoned the data controller on
14 March 2019, 20 March 2019 and 21 March 2019 to confirm the
correct address details and to discuss the complaint. During the
conversation on 21 March 2019 the data controller refused to

engage and hung up the telephone.

Sa The Commissioner wrote to the data controller again on 27 March
2019 and 28 March 2019 (copies enclosed). Subsequent calls were
made to the data controller on 6 June 2019, 10 June 2019, 11 June
2019 and 13 June 2019 but the data controller didn’t answer or

return the calls as requested.

9. The Commissioner subsequently issued a preliminary enforcement
notice on 26 June 2019 (copy enclosed) instructing the data
controller to respond to the complainant’s subject access request by
26 July 2019 but the data controller did not respond, either to the

complainant or to the Commissioner.

Mixed Sources
Product group from walllamanaged
esis, contralled sp a

T { ge
2 forests, controlled ppurees and
recy fiber
_
Cert no, TT COC-002272
@
1CO.
Information Commissioner's Office
10. The Commissioner has considered the data controller’s compliance
with the provisions of the DPA in light of this matter. The relevant

provisions of the DPA are the Sixth Data Protection Principle and

section 7.

11. The Sixth Data Protection Principle provides at Part I of Schedule 1
to the DPA that:

“Personal data shall be processed in accordance with the rights of

data subjects under this Act.”

12. Paragraph 8(a) of Part II of Schedule 1 to the DPA further provides
that:

“A person is to be regarded as contravening the sixth principle if,
but only if, he contravenes section 7 by failing to supply information

in accordance with that section.”
13. Section 7 of the DPA provides, amongst other things, as follows:

"(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section and to
sections 8, 9 and 9A, an individual is entitled -

(a) to be informed by any data controller whether personal
data of which that individual is the data subject are being

processed by or on behalf of that data controller,

(b) if that is the case, to be given by the data controller a
description of -

,
FSC
Mixed Sources
Pri willwyanaged
3 forests, controlled seurree and

recycled wood or liber

1 T-COC-002272
ww Ise org
;

E 1996 Forest Stewardship Council
Informatlon Commissioner's Office

(i) the personal data of which that individual is the

subject,

(ii) the purposes for which they are being or are to be

processed, and

(iii)the recipients or classes of recipients to whom they are

or may be disclosed,
(c) to have communicated to him in an intelligible form -

(i) the information constituting any personal data of which

that individual is the data subject, and

(ii) any information available to the data controller as to

the source of those data, ...”

"(8) ...a data controller shall comply with a request under this
section promptly and in any event before the end of the
prescribed period beginning with the relevant day.”

"(10) In this section-

‘nrescribed’ means prescribed by the Secretary of State
by regulations;
‘the prescribed maximum’ means such amount as may C ©

be prescribed; hoc

Mixed Sources
Product group from ywaellsiminaged
Information Commissloner’s Office

‘the prescribed period’ means forty days or such other

period as may be prescribed;

‘the relevant day’, in relation to a request under this
section, means the day on which the data controller
receives the request or, if later, the first day on which
the data controller has both the required fee and the

information referred to in subsection (3).”

14. The Commissioner is of the view that the data controller has
contravened the sixth data principle in that, contrary to section 7, it
has failed to inform the complainant, without undue delay, whether
their personal data is being processed by or on behalf of the data
controller and, where this is the case, failed, without undue delay,
to have communicated to them in an intelligible form such

information as may constitute personal data.

15. The Commissioner considered, as she is required to do under
section 40(2) of the DPA when deciding whether to serve an
enforcement notice, whether any contravention has caused or is
likely to cause any person damage or distress. The Commissioner
takes the view that damage or distress is likely as a result of the
complainant being denied the opportunity of properly understanding
what personal data is being processed about her by the data

controller.

16. In view of the matters referred to above, the Commissioner hereby
gives notice that, in exercise of her powers under section 40 of the
DPA, she requires that the data controller shall within 30 days of

this Notice take steps to:
FSC

Mixed Sources

Product group from see@-managed

5 forests, cantrolled agents and
recycled wood or fiber

Cert no TT-COC-002272
wrw.ls¢ org
1CO.

Information Commlissloner’s Office

Inform the complainant whether the personal data processed
by the data controller includes personal data of which the
complainant is the data subject, and shall supply them with
copies of any such personal data so processed in accordance
with the requirements of section 7 of the DPA and the Sixth
Data Protection Principle in that respect, subject only to the
proper consideration and application of any exemption from,
or modification to, section 7 of the DPA provided for in or by

virtue of Part IV of the DPA which may apply.

17. Failure to comply with this Notice is a criminal offence.

18. There is a right of appeal against this Notice to the First-tier
Tribunal (Information Rights), part of the General Regulatory
Chamber. Information about appeals is set out in the attached
Annex 1.

19. Dated the 9 day of August 2019

Signed...

 

Suzanne Gordon

Director of Data Protection Complaints and Compliance

Wycliffe House

Water Lane

Wilmslow
Cheshire
SK9 5SAF

FSC

Mixed Sources
Product grovp from Mmallimanaged
1CO.

Information Commisstoner’s Office

ANNEX 1

RIGHTS OF APPEAL AGAINST DECISIONS OF THE
COMMISSIONER

i Section 48 of the Data Protection Act 1998 gives any person
upon whom an enforcement notice has been served a right of
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Information Rights) (the
“Tribunal”) against the notice.

Py If you decide to appeal and if the Tribunal considers:-

a) that the notice against which the appeal is brought is
not in accordance with the law; or

b) to the extent that the notice involved an exercise of
discretion by the Commissioner, that she ought to have
exercised her discretion differently,

the Tribunal will allow the appeal or substitute such other
decision as could have been made by the Commissioner. In
any other case the Tribunal will dismiss the appeal.

3 You may bring an appeal by serving a notice of appeal on the
Tribunal at the following address:

GRC & GRP Tribunals
PO Box 9300
Leicester

LE1i 8DJ

Tel: 0300 1234504

Fax: 0870 739 5836

Email: GRC@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk

Website: www. justice.gov.uk/tribunals/general-
regulatory-chamber

The notice of appeal should be served on the Tribunal within
28 days of the date on which the enforcement notice was
sent.

4, The statutory provisions concerning appeals to the First-tier
Tribunal (General Regulatory Chamber) are contained in
sections 48 and 49 of, and Schedule 6 to, the Data Protection
Act 1998, and Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (General ©
Regulatory Chamber) Rules 2009 (Statutory Instrument 2009 ‘3
No. 1976 (L.20)). FSC

Mixed Sources
Product group from wall managed

7 forests, cantro eeeza and
recyded wood or fiber

www _{sc.org
© 15996 Forest Stewardship Couril