
Complain about lack of insight into security log
Published 19-12-2018
Decision
The Data Inspectorate has refused to initiate a complaint regarding lack of insight into extraction of the Tax Agency's security log, as the Data Protection Authority considers the complaint to be manifestly baseless. 2018-32-0500
Summary
The Data Inspectorate has refused to initiate a complaint regarding lack of insight into extraction of the Tax Agency's security log, as the Data Protection Authority considers the complaint to be manifestly unfounded. The Data Inspectorate found that the Tax Agency's security log was not covered by the complainant's right of access and that there was therefore no prospect that the Data Inspectorate would give the complainant the right in his complaint.
Decision
1. By e-mail of […] you have contacted the Data Inspectorate on the Tax Agency's processing of personal data about you.
The Data Inspectorate has understood your request as a complaint that the Danish Tax Agency has refused to give you insight into the extract from the Danish Tax Agency's security log of which employees have accessed the information that is available about you at the Debt Agency.
After reviewing your inquiry, the Data Inspectorate finds that there is no basis for initiating a complaint against the Danish Tax Agency, in accordance with Article 57 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4th
The following is a justification for the Danish Data Protection Agency's decision.
2. The rules on data protection are contained in a general EU regulation on the protection of personal data applicable in both the private and public sectors [1] and the Data Protection Act [2], which complements the rules of the regulation.
It follows from Article 57 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. Paragraph 1 (f) requires the supervisory authority to deal with complaints filed by a data subject.
Of paragraph 2 of the provision. 4 states that if the request - e.g. a complaint - is manifestly baseless or disproportionate, especially as the request is repeated, the regulator may refuse to comply with the request. The burden of proof that the request is manifestly baseless or disproportionate rests with the supervisory authority.
A complaint from a register is considered, among other things. to be manifestly unfounded if it does not contain relevant elements covered by the Data Protection Regulation, or if the request can already be said to be clearly futile on this basis.
3. In the opinion of the Data Inspectorate, there is no prospect that the Authority will find that your personal data is processed in contravention of the data protection rules and therefore the Authority refuses to process your complaint as it is manifestly unfounded, cf. Article 57 (2) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4th
The Danish Data Protection Agency has emphasized that this is extraction of logging information, which is a systemic facility where there is no independent processing of your personal data and that the logging is derived from the actual processing.
Against this background, the Data Inspectorate finds that the Danish Tax Agency's security log of which employees have accessed the information that is available to you in the Danish Debt Management Agency is not covered by your right of access under Article 15 of the Data Protection Regulation.
Accordingly, there is no prospect that the Data Inspectorate will give you a right in your complaint, and the Authority therefore refuses to initiate a complaint on the basis of your inquiry, cf. Article 57 (1) of the Data Protection Regulation. 4th
For your information, the Data Inspectorate can also refer to the Authority's case with ref. 2005-632-0077 [3] regarding access to the log of searches and searches in the CPR, where the Danish Data Protection Agency stated that the right of access did not include logging information (point 3 of the opinion).
4. The Data Inspectorate notes that the Data Protection Authority's decisions cannot be brought before another administrative authority, cf. section 30 of the Data Protection Act.
The Data Inspectorate will then not proceed further in connection with your inquiry.
If, after reading this letter, you continue to believe that personal information about you is being processed in violation of the Data Protection Rules, you may file a police report with the data controller or pursue the claim in court.


[1] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such information and repealing Directive 95/46 / EC (general data protection regulation).
[2] Act No 502 of 23 May 2018 on additional provisions for a regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free exchange of such information (Data Protection Act).
[3] The decision is published on the Danish Data Protection Agency's website and can be accessed via the following link: https://www.datatilsynet.dk/tilsyn-og-afgierer/historiske-afgerer/2005/jun/videregivelse-of-information-from-cpr- to private companies-ii /.
